In which the Reader will find a Description of a Beauty, in a Style truly
sublime.

THE new-fallen Snow, pursued Sir George, was tanned, in Comparison of the
refined Purity of that White which made up the Ground of her Complexion; and,
though Fear had a little gathered the Carnations of her Cheeks, yet her Joy at
being delivered seemed to plant them there with such fresh Advantages, that my
Eye might shrink at the Brightness of that mingled Luster: Her Mouth, as well
for Shape as Color, might shame the Imitation of the best Pencils, and the
liveliest Tints; and though through some petty Intervals of Joy, it wanted the
Smiles, which Grief and Terror sequestered, yet she never opened it, but like
the East, at the Birth of a beautiful Day, and then discovered Treasures, whose
excelling Whiteness made the Price inestimable: All the Features of her Face
had so near a Kindred to Proportion and Symmetry, as the several Masters of
Apelles's Art might have called it his Glory to have copied Beauties from her,
as the best of Models: The Circumference of her Visage showed the Extremes of
an imperfect Circle, and almost formed it to a perfect Oval: And this
Abridgment of Marvels was tapered by a Pair of the brightest Stars, that ever
were lighted up by the Hand of Nature: As their Color was the same with the
Heavens, there was a spherical Harmony in their Motion; and that mingled with a
Vivacity so penetrating, as neither the firmest Eye, nor the strongest Soul,
could arm themselves with a Resistance of Proof against those pointed Glories:
Her Head was crowned with a prodigious Quantity of fair long Hair, which Color
as fitly suited the Beauty of her Eyes, as Imagination could make it: To these
Marvels of Face were joined the rest of her Neck, Hands, and Shape; and there
seemed a Contest between the Form and Whiteness of the two former, which had
the largest Commission from Nature to work Wonders.

In fine, her Beauty was miraculous, and could not fail of producing a sudden
Effect upon a Heart like mine.

Having passed in an Instant from the extremest Admiration, to something yet
more tender, I reiterated my Offers of Service to the fair Unknown; who told
me, she feared her Father had Occasion for some Assistance, her Ravisher having
left his Men to engage him, and keep off his Pursuit, while he rode off with
his Prize: Hereupon I begged her to direct me to the Place where she left her
Father, assuring her I would gladly venture my Life a Second time, to preserve
his; and she desiring to go with me, I placed her before me on my Horse, and
had the exquisite Pleasure of supporting with my Arms the fairest and most
admirable Creature in the World.

In less than half an Hour, which had appeared to me but a Moment, we got to
the Place where she had been torn from her Father; whom we beheld with three of
his Servants, maintaining a Fight against twice as many of their Enemies.

Having gently set down the beauteous Unknown upon the Grass, I flew to the
Relief of her Father; and, throwing myself furiously amongst his Assailants,
dispatched two of them with so many Blows: The others, seeing so unexpected an
Assistance, gave back a little; and I took Advantage of their Consternation, to
redouble my Blows, and brought Two more of them at my Feet.

There remained now but Four to overcome; and my Arrival having given new
Vigor to those whose Part I had taken, they seconded me so well, that we soon
had nothing more left to do; for the rest, seeing their Comrades slain, sought
their Safety in Flight: We were too generous to pursue them, the Blood of such
Wretches being unworthy to be shed by our Swords.

The fair Unknown, seeing us Conquerors, flew to embrace her Father; who,
holding her pressed between his Arms, turned his Eyes upon me; then quitting
her, came toward me, and, in the most obliging Terms imaginable, returned me
Thanks for the Assistance I had brought him; and being informed by his
Daughter, of what I had done for her Preservation, this old Gentleman renewed
his Acknowlegements, calling me the Preserver of his Life, the valiant Defender
of his Daughter's Honor, his tutelary Angel, and the Guardian of his House.

In fine, he loaded me with so many Thanks and Praises, that I could not choose
but be in some Confusion; and, to put an End to them, I begged he would inform
me, by what means he came into that Misfortune.

He told me, that, residing in a Castle at the Extremity of this Forest, the
Charms of his Daughter had captivated a neighboring Lord, whose Character and
Person being disagreeable both to her and himself, he had absolutely refused to
give her to him: Thereupon he had set upon them as they were going to visit a
Relation at some Distance, and, dragging Philonice out of the Coach, put her
before him on his Horse, and carried her away, leaving Eight of his Men to
engage him, and his Servants; who, being but Four in Number, must inevitably
have perished, had I not come to his Relief, and, by my miraculous Valor,
vanquished all his Enemies.

Saying this, he desired me to go home with him to the Castle; and having led
his Daughter to the Coach, insisted upon my placing myself next her; and,
getting in himself, ordered them to return home.

This Accident having altered his Design of making the Visit which had been the
Occasion of his Journey;

The Baron, for that I found was his Title, entertained me, all the Way, with
repeated Expressions of Acknowledgements and Tenderness; and the incomparable
Philonice condescended also to assure me of her Gratitude for the Service I had
done her.

At our Arrival at the Castle, I perceived it was very large and magnificent:
The Baron conducted me to one of the best Apartments, and would stay in the
Room till my Armor was taken off, that he might be assured I had received no
Hurts: Having rendered him the like Civility in his own Chamber, and satisfied
myself he was not wounded, we returned to the beautiful Philonice; and this
second Sight having finished my Defeat, I remained so absolutely her Slave,
that neither Dorothea nor Sydimiris were more passionately beloved.

At the earnest Entreaty of the Baron, I staid some Weeks in the Castle; during
which, the daily Sight of Philonice so augmented my Flames, that I was no
longer in a Condition to conceal them; but, fearing to displease that Divine
Beauty by a Confession of my Passion, I languished in secret; and the
Constraint I laid upon myself, gave me such Torments, that I fell into a
profound Melancholy, and looked so pale and dejected, that the Baron was
sensible of the Alteration, and conjured me in the most pressing Terms, to
acquaint him with the Cause of my Uneasiness: But though I continued
obstinately silent with my Tongue, yet my Eyes spoke intelligibly enough; and
the Blushes which appeared in the fair Cheeks of Philonice, whenever she spoke
to me on the Subject of my Grief, convinced me she was not ignorant of my
Passion.

At length the Agitation of my Mind throwing me into a Fever, the Baron, who
was firmly persuaded, that my Illness proceeded from some concealed Vexation,
pressed me continually to declare myself; and, finding all his Entreaties
ineffectual, he commanded his Daughter to endeavor to find out the Cause of
that Grief which had put me into such a Condition.

For that Purpose therefore, having brought the fair Philonice into my Chamber,
he staid a few Minutes, and, leaving the Room, under Pretense of Business,
Philonice remained alone by my Bedside, her Women, out of Respect, staying at
the other End of the Chamber.

This Divine Person, seeing herself alone with me, and remembering her Father's
Command, blushed, and cast down her Eyes in such apparent Confusion, that I
could not help observing it: And, interpreting it to the Displeasure she took
in being so near me,

Whatever Joy I take in the Honor your Visit does me, Madam, said I, in a weak
Voice; yet since nothing is so dear to me, as your Satisfaction, I would rather
dispense with this Mark of your Goodness to an unfortunate Wretch, then see you
in the least Constraint.

And why, replied she, with a Tone full of Sweetness, do you suppose that I am
here by Constraint, when it would be more just to believe, that in visiting the
valiant Defender of my Honor, and the Life of my Father, I only follow my own
Inclinations?

Ah! Madam, said I, transported with Joy at so favorable a Speech, the little
Service I had the Happiness to do you, does not merit so infinite a Favor; and
though I had lost the best Part of my Blood in your Defense, I should have been
well rewarded with your Safety.

Since you do not repent of what you have done, replied she, I am willing to be
obliged to you for another Favor; and ask it with the greater Hope of
obtaining it, as I must acquaint you, it is by my Father's Command I take that
Liberty, who is much interested in my Success.

There is no Occasion, Madam, returned I, to make use of any Interest but your
own, to engage me to obey you, since that is, and ever will be, all-powerful
with me: Speak then, Madam, and let me know what it is you desire of me, that I
may, once in my Life, have the Glory of obeying you.

It is, said she, blushing still more than before, that you will acquaint us
with the Cause of that Melancholy, which has, as we imagine, occasioned your
present Illness.

At these Words I trembled, turned pale; and, not daring to discover the true
Cause of my Affliction, I remained in a profound Silence.

I see, said the beautiful Philonice, that you have no Inclination to obey me;
and since my Request has, as I perceive, given you some Disturbance, I will
prevail upon my Father to press you no farther upon this Subject.

No, Madam, said I, eagerly; the Baron shall be satisfied, and you shall be
obeyed; though, after the Knowledge of my Crime, you doom me to that Death I so
justly merit.

Yes Madam, this unfortunate Man, who has had the Glory to acquire your Esteem
by the little Service he did you, has cancelled the Merit of that Service by
daring to adore you.

I love you, divine Philonice; and, not being able either to repent, or cease
to be guilty of loving you, I am resolved to die, and spare you the Trouble of
pronouncing my Sentence. I beseech you therefore to believe, that I would have
died in Silence, but for your Command to declare myself, and you should never
have known the Excess of my Love and Despair, had not my Obedience to your Will
obliged me to confess it.

I finished these Words with so much Fear and Confusion, that I durst not lift
my Eyes up to the fair Face of Philonice, to observe how she received this
Discourse: I waited therefore, trembling, for her Answer; but finding that in
several Minutes she spoke not a Word, I ventured at last, to cast a languishing
Glance upon the Visage I adored, and saw so many Marks of Disorder upon it,
that I was almost dead with the Apprehensions of having offended her beyond
even the Hope of procuring her Pardon by my Death.
