mystery explained by Joey, we arrive at London -- our dress and appearance
described -- we are insulted in the street -- an adventure in the alehouse --
-- we are imposed upon by a waggish footman -- set to rights by a tobacconist
-- take lodgings -- dive for a dinner -- an accident at our ordinary. p. 94
CHAP. XIV. We visit Strap's friend -- a description of him -- his advice -- we
go to Mr. Cringer's house -- are denied admittance -- an accident befalls Strap
-- his behavior thereupon -- an extraordinary adventure occurs, in the course
of which I lose all my money. p. 104 CHAP. XV. Strap moralizes -- presents his
purse to me -- we inform our landlord of my misfortune, who unravels the
mystery -- I present myself to Cringer -- he recommends and turns me over to
Mr. Staytape -- I become acquainted with a fellow dependant, who explains the
characters of Cringer and Staytape -- and informs me of the method to be
pursued at the Navy-office, and Surgeon's-hall -- Strap is employed. p. 113
CHAP. XVI. My new acquaintance breaks an appointment -- I proceed by myself to
the Navy-office -- address myself to a person there, who assists me with his
advice -- I write to the board -- they grant me a letter to the Surgeons at the
hall -- I am informed of the beau's name and character -- I find him -- he
makes me his confident in an amor -- desires me to pawn my linen, for his
occasions -- I recover what I lent him -- some curious observations of Strap on
that occasion -- his vanity. p. 122 CHAP. XVII. I go to Surgeon's hall, where I
meet with Mr. Jackson -- I am examined -- a fierce dispute arises between two
of the examiners -- Jackson disguises himself to attract respect -- is detected
-- in hazard of being sent to Bridewell -- he treats us at a tavern -- carries
us to a night-house, a troublesome adventure there -- we are committed to the
Round-house -- carried before a justice -- his behavior. p. 134 CHAP. XVIII. I
carry my qualifications to the Navy-office -- the nature of it -- the behavior
of the s -- t -- y -- Strap's concern for my absence -- a battle between him
and a blacksmith -- the troublesome consequences of it -- his harrangue to me
-- his friend the schoolmaster recommends me to a French apothecary, who
entertains me as a journeyman. p. 146 CHAP. XIX. The characters of Mr.
Lavement, his wife and daughter -- some anecdotes of the family -- the mother
and daughter rivals -- I am guilty of a mistake that gives me present
satisfaction, but is attended with troublesome consequences. p. 155 CHAP. XX. I
am assaulted and dangerously wounded -- I suspect Odonnel, and am confirmed in
my opinion -- I concert a scheme of revenge, and put it in execution -- Odonnel
robs his own servant, and disappears -- I make my addresses to a lady, and am
miraculously delivered from her snare. p. 164 CHAP. XXI. Squire Gawky comes to
lodge with my master -- is involved in a troublesome affair, out of which he is
extricated by me -- he marries my master's daughter -- they conspire against me
-- I am found guilty of theft -- discharged -- deserted by my friends -- I hire
a room in St. Giles's -- where, by accident, I find the lady to whom I made my
addresses, in a miserable condition -- I relieve her. p. 172 CHAP. XXII. The
history of Miss Williams. p. 185 CHAP. XXIII. She is interrupted by a bailif,
who arrests, and carries her to the marshalsea -- I accompany her -- bring
witnesses to prove she is not the same person named in the writ -- the bailif
is fain to give her a present, and discharge her -- we shift our lodging -- she
resumes her story and ends it -- my reflections thereupon -- she makes me
acquainted with the progress of a common woman of the town -- resolves to quit
that way of life. p. 201 CHAP. XXIV. I am reduced to great misery -- assaulted
on Tower Hill by a press-gang, who put me on board a tender -- my usage there
-- my arrival on board of the Thunder man of war, where I am put in irons, and
afterward released by the good offices of Mr. Thomson, who recommends me as
assistant to the surgeon -- he relates his own story, and makes me acquainted
with the characters of the captain, surgeon, and first mate. p. 218 CHAP. XXV.
The behavior of Mr. Morgan -- his pride, displeasure and generosity -- the
economy of our mess described -- Thomson's further friendship -- the nature of
my duty explained -- the situation of the sick. p. 229 CHAP. XXVI. A
disagreeable accident happens to me in the discharge of my office -- Morgan's
nose is offended -- a dialogue between him and the ship's steward -- upon
examination, I find more causes of complaint than one -- my hair is cut off --
Morgan's cookery -- The manner of sleeping on board -- I am waked in the night
by a dreadful noise. p. 236 CHAP. XXVII. I acquire the friendship of the
surgeon, who procures a warrant for me, and makes me a present of clothes -- a
battle between a midshipman and me -- the surgeon leaves the ship -- the
captain comes on board with another surgeon -- a dialogue between the captain
and Morgan -- the sick are ordered to be brought upon the quarter deck and
examined -- the consequences of that order -- a madman accuses Morgan, and is
set at liberty by command of the captain, whom he instantly attacks and pummels
without mercy. p. 242 CHAP. XXVIII. The captain enraged, threatens to put the
madman to death with his own hand -- is diverted from that resolution by the
arguments and persuasion of the first lieutenant and surgeon -- we set sail for
St. Helens, join the sleet under the command of Sir C -- n -- r O -- le, and
proceed for the West Indies -- are overtaken by a terrible tempest -- my friend
Jack Rattlin has his leg broke by a fall from the main-yard -- the behavior of
doctor Mackshane -- Jack opposes the amputation of his limb, in which he is
seconded by Morgan and me, who undertake the cure, and perform it successfully.
p. 252 CHAP. XXIX. Mackshane's malice -- I am taken up and imprisoned for a spy
-- Morgan meets with the same fate -- Thomson is tampered with to turn evidence
against us -- disdains the proposal, and is maltreated for his integrity --
Morgan is released to assist the surgeon during an engagement with some French
ships of war -- I remain fettered on the poop, exposed to the enemy's shot, and
grow delirious with fear -- am comforted after the battle by Morgan, who speaks
freely of the captain; is overheard by the sentinel, who informs against him,
and again imprisoned -- Thomson grows desperate, and notwithstanding the
remonstrances of Morgan and me, goes overboard in the night. p. 259 CHAP. XXX.
We lament over the fate of our companion -- the captain offers Morgan his
liberty, which he refuses to accept -- we are brought before him and examined
-- Morgan is sent back to custody, whither also I am remanded after a curious
trial. p. 266. CHAP. XXXI. I discover a subornation against me, by means of a
quarrel between two of the evidences; in consequence of which, I am set at
liberty, and prevail upon Morgan to accept of his freedom on the same terms --
Mackshane's malice -- we arrive at Jamaica, from whence in a short time we beat
up to Hispaniola, in conjunction with the West-Indian squadron -- we take in
water, sail again, and arrive at Carthagena -- reflections on our conduct
there. p. 277 CHAP. XXXII. Our land forces being disembarked, erect a faschine
battery -- our ship is ordered with four more, to batter the fort of Bocca
Chica -- Mackshane's cowardice -- the chaplain's phrenzy -- honest Rattlin
loses one hand -- his heroism, and reflections on the battle -- Crampley's
behavior to me during the heat of the fight. p. 282 CHAP. XXXIII. A breach
being made in the walls, our soldiers give the assault, take the place without
opposition -- our sailors at the same time become masters of all the other
strengths near Bocca Chica, and take possession of the harbor -- the good
consequences of this success -- we move nearer the town -- find two forts
deserted, and the channel blocked up with sunk vessels; which however, we find
means to clear -- land our soldiers at La Quinta -- repulse a body of militia
-- attack the castle of St. Lazar, and are forced to retreat with great loss --
the remains of our army are re-embarked -- an effort of the admiral to take the
town -- the economy of our expedition described. p. 289 CHAP. XXXIV. An
epidemic fever rages among us -- we abandon our conquests -- I am seized with
the distemper; write a petition to the captain, which is rejected -- I am in
danger of suffocation through the malice of Crampley; and relieved by a
sergeant -- my fever increases -- the chaplain wants to confess me -- I obtain
a favorable crisis -- Morgan's affection for me proved -- the behavior of
Mackshane and Crampley toward me -- Captain Oakhum is removed into another
ship with his beloved doctor -- our new captain described -- an adventure of
Morgan. p. 297 CHAP. XXXV. Captain Whiffle sends for me -- his situation
described -- his surgeon arrives, prescribes for him, and puts him to bed -- a
bed is put up for Mr. Simper contiguous to the state-room, which, with other
parts of the captain's behavior, gives the ship's company a very unfavourable
idea of their commander -- I am detained in the West Indies, by the admiral,
and go on board the Lizard sloop of war, in quality of surgeon's mate, where I
make myself known to the surgeon, who treats me very kindly -- I go on shore,
sell my ticket, purchase necessaries, and at my return on board, am surprised
at the sight of Crampley, who is appointed lieutenant of the sloop -- we sail
on a cruize -- take a prize, in which I arrive at port Morant, under the
command of my mess-mate, with whom I live in great harmony. p. 309 CHAP. XXXVI.
A strange adventure -- in consequence of which I am extremely happy -- Crampley
does me ill offices with the captain: but his malice is defeated by the
goodnature and friendship of the surgeon -- we return to Port Royal -- our
captain gets the command of a larger ship, and is succeeded by an old man --
Brayl is provided for -- we receive orders to sail for England. p. 316
THE ADVENTURES OF RODERICK RANDOM.
CHAP. I.
Of my birth and parentage.

I WAS born in the northern part of this united kingdom in the house of my
grandfather, a gentleman of considerable fortune and influence, who had on many
occasions signalized himself in behalf of his country; and was remarkable for
his abilities in the law, which he exercised with great success, in quality of
a judge, particularly against beggars, for whom he had a singular aversion.

My father, his youngest son, sell in love with a poor relation, who lived with
the old gentleman, and performed the office of housekeeper; whom he privately
espoused; of which marriage I am the first fruit. -- During her pregnancy, a
dream discomposed my mother so much, that my father, tired with her
importunity, at last consulted a seer, whose favorable interpretation he would
have secured beforehand by a bribe, but found him incorruptible. She dreamed,
she was delivered of a tennis-ball, which the devil (who to her great surprise,
acted the part of a midwife) struck so forcibly with a racket, that it
disappeared in an instant; and she was for some time inconsolable for the loss
of her offspring; when all of a sudden, she beheld it return with equal
violence, and earth itself beneath her feet, whence immediately sprung up a
goodly tree covered with blossoms, the scent of which operated so strongly on
her nerves that she awoke. -- The attentive sage, after some deliberation,
assured my parents, that their firstborn would be a great traveller, that he
would undergo many dangers and difficulties, and at last return to his native
land, where he would flourish with great reputation and happiness. -- How truly
this was foretold, will appear in the sequel. -- It was not long before some
officious person informed my grandfather of familiarities that passed between
his son and housekeeper, which alarmed him so much, that, a few days after, he
told my father it was high time for him to enter into the holy state of
matrimony, and that he had provided a match for him, to which he could in
justice have no objections. My father, finding it would be impossible to
conceal his situation much longer, frankly owned what he had done, and excused
himself for not having asked the consent of his father, by saying, he knew it
would be to no purpose; and that, had his inclination been known, my
grandfather might have taken such measures as would have effectually put the
gratification of it out of his power: he added, that no exception could be made
to his wife's virtue, birth, beauty, and good sense, and as for fortune, it was
beneath his consideration. -- The old gentleman, who kept all his passions
(except one) in excellent order, heard him to an end with great temper; and
then calmly asked, how he proposed to maintain himself and spouse? -- He
replied, he could be in no danger of wanting, while his father's tenderness
remained, which he and his wife would always cherish with the utmost
veneration; that he was persuaded his allowance would be suitable to the
dignity and circumstances of his family, and the provision already made to his
brothers and sisters, who were happily settled under his protection. -- Your
brothers and sisters, said my grandfather, did not think it beneath them to
consult me in an affair of such importance as matrimony; neither (I suppose)
would you have omitted that piece of duty, had you not some secret fund in
reserve, to the comforts of which I leave you, with a desire that you will this
night, seek out another habitation for yourself and wife, whither in a short
time, I will send you an account of the ^pence I have been at in your
education, with a view of being reimbursed. -- Sir, you have made the grand
tour -- you are a polite gentleman -- a very pretty gentleman -- I wish you a
great deal of joy, and am your very humble servant. So saying, he left my
father in a situation easily imagined. However, he did not long hesitate; for
lbeing perfectly well acquainted with his father's disposition, he did not
doubt that he was glad of this pretense to get rid of him; and as his resolves
were invariable like the laws of the Medes and Persians, he knew it would be to
no purpose to attempt him by prayers and entreaties; so without any farther
application, he betook himself with his disconsolate bedfellow, to a
farm-house, where an old servant of his mother dwelt; there they remained some
time in a situation but ill adapted to the elegance of their desires and
tenderness of their love; which nevertheless, my father endured, rather than
supplicate an unnatural and inflexible parent: but my mother, foreseeing the
inconveniences she would be exposed to, if she must be delivered in this place
(and her pregnancy was very far advanced) without communicating her design to
her husband, went in disguise to the house of my grandfather, hoping that her
tears and condition would move him to compassion, and reconcile him to an event
which could not otherwise be amended -- She found means to deceive the
servants, and was introduced as an unfortunate lady, who wanted to complain of
some matrimonial grievances, it being my grandfather's particular province to
decide in all cases of scandal. She was accordingly admitted into his presence,
where discovering herself, she sell at his seet, and in the most affecting
manner, implored his forgiveness; at the same time, representing the danger
that threatened not only her life, but that of his own grandchild which was
about to see the light. -- He told her, he was sorry that the indiscretion of
her and his son had compelled him to make a vow, which put it out of his power
to give them any assistance -- That he had already imparted his thoughts on
that subject to her husband, and was surprised that they should disturb his
peace with any further importunity. -- This said, he retired. -- The violence
of my mother's affliction had such an effect on her constitution, that she was
immediately seized with the pains of childbed; and had not an old maidservant
to whom she was very dear, afforded her pity and assistance, at the hazard of
incurring my grandfather's displeasure, she and the innocent fruit of her womb
must have fallen miserable victims to his rigor and inhumanity. -- By the
friendship of this poor woman, she was carried up to a garret, and immediately
delivered of a man-child, the story of whose unfortunate birth, he himself now
relates. -- My father being informed of what had happened, flew to the embraces
of his darling spouse, and while he loaded his off spring with paternal
caresses, could not forbear shedding a flood of tears, on beholding the dear
partner of his heart (for whose ease he would have sacrificed the treasures of
the east) stretched upon a flock-bed, in a miserable apartment, unable to
protect her from the inclemencies of the weather. -- It is not to be supposed
that the old gentleman was ignorant of what passed, though he affected to know
nothing of the matter, and pretended to be very much surprised, when the son of
his deceased eldest son, a pert boy, who lived with him as his heir apparent,
acquainted him with the affair; he determined therefore to preserve no medium,
but immediately (on the third day after her delivery) sent her a peremptory
order to begone, and turned off the servant who had preserved her life. This
behavior so exasperated my father, that he had recourse to the most dreadful
imprecations, and on his bare knees implored that heaven would renounce him, if
ever he should forget or forgive the barbarity of his fire. -- The injuries
which this unhappy mother received from her removal in such circumstances, and
the want of necessaries where she lodged, together with her grief and anxiety
of mind, soon threw her into a languishing disorder which put an end to her
life. My father, who loved her tenderly, was so affected with her death, that
he remained six weeks deprived of his senses; during which time, the people
where he lodged, carried the infant to the old man, who relented so far, on
hearing the melancholy story of his daughter-in-law's death, and the deplorable
condition of his son, that he sent the child to nurse, and ordered my father to
be carried home to his house, where he soon recovered the use of his reason. --
Whether this hard-hearted judge felt any remorse for his cruel treatment of his
son and daughter; or (which is more probable) was afraid his character would
suffer in the neighborhood; he professed great sorrow for his conduct to my
father, whose delirium was succeeded by a profound melancholy and reserve. At
length he disappeared, and notwithstanding all imaginable inquiry, could never
be heard of, which confirmed most people in the opinion of his having made away
with himself in a fit of despair. -- How I understood the particulars of my
birth, will appear in the course of these memoirs.

CHAP. II.
I grew up -- am hated by my relations -- sent to school -- neglected by my
grandfather -- maltreated by my master -- seasoned to adversity -- form cabals
against the pedant -- debarred access to my grandfather -- hunted by his heir
-- demolish the teeth of his tutor.

THERE were not wanting some, who suspected my uncles of being concerned in my
father's fate, on the supposition that they would all share in the patrimony
destined for him: and this conjecture seemed supported by reflecting, that in
all his calamities they never discovered the least inclination to serve him;
but, on the contrary, by all the artifices in their power, fed his father's
resentment, and strengthened his resolution of leaving him to misery and want.
-- But people of judgment treated this insinuation as an idle chimera; because
had my relations been so wicked as to consult their interest by committing such
an attrocious crime. the fate of my father would have extended to me too, whose
life was another obstacle to their expectation. -- Mean while, I grew apace,
and as I strongly resembled my father, who was the darling of the tenants, I
wanted nothing which their indigent circumstances could afford: but their
favor was a weak resource against the jealous enmity of my cousins; who, the
more my infancy promised, conceived the more implacable hatred against me; and
before I was six years of age, had so effectually blockaded my grandfather,
that I never saw him but by stealth; when I sometimes made up to his chair as
he fat to view his laborers in the field: on which occasions, he would stroke
my head, bid me be a good boy, and promise he would take care of me. -- I was
soon after sent to school at a village hard by, of which he had been dictator
time out of mind: but as he neither paid for my board, nor supplied me with
clothes, books, and other necessaries I required, my condition was very ragged
and contemptible, and the schoolmaster, who through fear of my grandfather
taught me gratis, gave himself no concern about the progress I made under his
instruction. -- In spite of all these difficulties and disgraces, I became a
good proficient in the Latin tongue; and as soon as I could write tolerably,
pestered my grandfather with letters to such a degree, that he sent for my
master, and chid him severely for bestowing such pains on my education, telling
him, that if ever I should be brought to the gallows for forgery, which he had
taught me to commit, my blood should lie on his head. -- The pedant, who
dreaded nothing more than the displeasure of his patron, assured his honor
that the boy's ability was more owing to his own genius and application, than
to any instruction or encouragement he received; that, although he could not
divest him of the knowledge he had already imbibed, unless he would empower him
to disable his fingers, he should endeavor, with G -- d's help, to prevent his
future improvement. And indeed, he punctually performed what he he had
undertaken: for, on pretense that I had wrote impertinent letters to my
grandfather, he caused a board to be made with five holes in it, through which
he thrust the fingers and thumb of my right hand, and fastened it by whip-cord
to my wrist, in such a manner, that I was effectually debarred the use of my
pen. But this restraint I was freed from in a few days, by an accident which
happened in a quarrel between me and another boy, who taking upon him to insult
my poverty, I was so incensed at this ungenerous reproach, that with one stroke
of my machine, I cut him to the skull, to the great terror of myself and
school-fellows, who left him bleeding on the ground, and ran to inform the
master of what had happened. I was so severely punished for this trespass,
that, were I to live to the age of Methusalem, the impression it made on me
would not be effaced; no more than the antipathy and horror I conceived for the
merciless tyrant who inflicted it. The contempt which my appearance naturally
produced, in all who saw me, the continual wants I was exposed to, and my own
haughty disposition, impatient of affronts, involved me in a thousand
troublesome adventures, by which I was at length enured to adversity, and
emboldened to undertakings far above my years. I was often inhumanly scourged
for crimes I did not commit, because having the character of a vagabond in the
village, every piece of mischief whose author lay unknown, was charged upon me.
-- I have been found guilty of robbing orchards I never entered, of killing
cats I never hurted, of stealing gingerbread I never touched, and of abusing
old women I never saw. -- Nay, a stammering carpenter had eloquence enough to
persuade my master, that I fired a pistol loaded with small shot, into his
window; though my landlady and the whole family bore witness, that I was a-bed
fast asleep at the time when this outrage was committed. -- I was flogged for
having narrowly escaped drowning, by the sinking of a ferry-boat in which I was
passenger. -- Another time for having recovered of a bruise occasioned by a
horse and cart running over me. -- A third time, for being bit by a baker's
dog. -- In short, whether I was guilty or unfortunate, the vengeance and
sympathy of this arbitrary pedagogue were the same. Far from being subdued by
this insernal usage, my indignation triumphed over that slavish awe which had
hitherto enforced my obedience; and the more my years and knowledge increased,
the more I perceived the injustice and barbarity of his behavior. By the help
of an uncommon genius, and the advice and direction of our usher, who had
served my father in his travels, I made a surprising progress in the classicks,
writing and arithmetic; so that before I was twelve years old, I was
confessedly the best scholar in the school: This qualification, together with a
boldness of temper, and strength of make, which had subjected almost all my
cotemporaries, gave me such influence over them, that I began to form cabals
against my persecutor; and was in hopes of being able to bid him defiance in a
very short time. -- Being at the head of a faction consisting of thirty boys,
most of them of my own age, I was determined to put their metal to trial, that
I might know how far they were to be depended upon, before I put my grand
scheme in execution: with this view we attacked a body of stout apprentices,
who had taken possession of a part of the ground allotted to us, for the scene
of our diversions; and who were then playing at nine-pins on the spot: but I
had the mortification to see my adherents routed in an instant, and a leg of
one of them broke in his flight by the bowl, which one of our adversaries had
detached in pursuit of us. -- This discomfiture did not hinder us from engaging
them afterward, in frequent skirmishes which we maintained by throwing stones
at a distance, wherein I received many wounds, the sears of which still remain.
Our enemies were so harassed and interrupted by these alarms, that they at last
abandoned their conquest, and left us to the peaceable enjoyment of our own
territories. -- It would be endless to enumerate the exploits we performed in
the course of this consederacy, which became the terror of the whole village;
insomuch, that when different interests divided it, one of the parties commonly
courted the assistance of Roderick Random (by which name I was known) to cast
the balance, and keep the opposite section in awe. -- Meanwhile, I took the
advantage of every play-day, to present myself before my grandfather, to whom I
seldom found access, by reason of his being so closely besieged by a numerous
family of his female grandchildren, who, though they perpetually quarrelled
among themselves, never failed to join against me, as the common enemy of all.
His heir, who was about the age of eighteen, minded nothing but fox-hunting,
and indeed was qualified for nothing else, notwithstanding his grandfather's
indulgence, in entertaining a tutor for him at home; who at the same time
performed the office of parish clerk. This young Acteon, who inherited his
grandfather's antipathy to every thing in distress, never set eyes on me,
without uncoupling his beagles, and hunting me into some cottage or other,
whither I generally fled for shelter. In this christian amusement, he was
encouraged by his preceptor, who, no doubt, took such opportunities to
ingratiate himself with the rising sun, observing that the old gentleman,
according to course of nature, had not long to live, being already on the verge
of fourscore. -- The behavior of this rascally sycophant incensed me so much,
that one day, when I was beleagured by him and his hounds into a farmer's
house, where I had found protection, I took aim at him (being an excellent
marksman) with a large pebble, which struck out four of his foreteeth, and
effectually incapacitated him for doing the office of a clerk ever after.

CHAP. III.
My mother's brother arrives -- relieves me -- a description of him -- goes
along with me to the house of my grandfather -- is encountered by his dogs --
defeats them after a bloody engagement -- is admitted to the old gentleman -- a
dialogue between them.

ABOUT this time, my mother's only brother, who had been long abroad,
lieutenant of a man of war, arrived in his own country; where being informed of
my condition, he came to see me, and out of his slender finances, not only
supplied me with what necessaries I wanted for the present, but resolved not to
leave the country, until he had prevailed on my grandfather to settle something
handsome for the future. This was a task to which he was by no means equal,
being entirely ignorant not only of the judge's disposition, but also
unacquainted with the ways of men in general, to which his education on board
had kept him an utter stranger. -- He was a strong built man, somewhat
bandylegged, with a neck like that of a bull, and a face which (you might
easily perceive) had withstood the most obstinate assaults of the weather. --
His dress consisted of a soldier's coat altered for him by the ship's tailor, a
stripped flannel jacket, a pair of red breeches japanned with pitch, clean gray
worsted stockings, large silver buckles that covered three-fourths of his
shoes, a silverlaced hat whose crown over-looked the brims about an inch and a
half, a black bob wig in the buckle, a check shirt, a silk handkerchief, an
hanger with a brass handle girded to his thigh by a tarnished laced belt, and a
good oak plant under his arm. -- Thus equipt, he set out with me (who by his
bounty made a very decent appearance) for my grandfather's house, where we were
saluted by Jowler and Caesar, whom my cousin, young master, had let loose at
our approach. Being well acquainted with the inveteracy of these curs, I was
about to betake myself to my heels, when my uncle seizing me with one hand,
brandished his cudgel with the other, and at one blow laid Caesar sprawling on
the ground: but finding himself attacked at the same time in the rear by
Jowler, and fearing Caesar might recover, he drew his hanger, wheeled about,
and by a lucky stroke, severed Jowler's head from his body. -- By this time,
the young fox-hunter and three servants armed with pitch-forks and flails were
come to the assistance of the dogs, whom they found breathless upon the field.
My cousin was so provoked at the death of his favorites, that he ordered his
attendants to advance, and take vengeance on their executioner, whom he loaded
with all the curses and reproaches his anger could suggest. -- Upon which my
uncle stepped forwards with an undaunted air, at the sight of whose bloody
weapon, his antagonists fell back with precipitation; when he accosted their
leader thus: -- "Lookee, brother, your dogs having boarded me without
provocation, what I did was in my own desence. -- So you had best be civil, and
let us shoot ahead, clear of you." Whether the young 'squire misinterpreted my
uncle's desire of peace, or was enraged at the fate of his hounds beyond his
usual pitch of resolution, I know not; but he snatched a flall from one of his
followers, and came up with a show of assaulting the lieutenant, who putting
himself into a posture of defense, proceeded thus: -- "Lookee, you lubberly son
of a w -- e, if you come athwart me, 'ware your gingerbreadwork. -- I Will be
foul of your quarter, d -- n me." This declaration followed by a slourish of
his hanger, seemed to check the progress of the young gentleman's choler, who,
upon turning about, perceived his attendants had slunk into the house, shut the
gate, and left him to decide the contention by himself. -- Here a parley
ensued, which was introduced by my cousin's asking, "Who the d -- l are you? --
What do you want? -- Some scoundrel of a seaman (I suppose) who has deserted
and turned thief. -- But don't think you shall escape, sirrah, -- I Will have you
hanged, you dog, -- I will. -- Your blood shall pay for that of my two hounds,
you ragamuffin. -- I would not have parted with them to save your whole
generation from the gallows, you ruffian, you." -- "None of your jaw, you swab,
-- none of your jaw (replied my uncle) else I shall trim your laced jacket for
you -- I shall rub you down with an oaken towel, my boy -- I shall." -- So
saying, he sheathed his hanger and grasped his cudgel. Meanwhile the people of
the house being alarmed, one of my female cousins opened a window, and asked
what was the matter? -- "The matter! (answered the lieutenant) no great matter,
young woman. -- I have business with the old gentleman, and this spark, belike,
will not allow me to come along side of him, that is all." -- After a few minutes
pause, we were admitted, and conducted to my grandfather's chamber, through a
lane of my relations, who honored me with very significant looks, as I passed
along. -- When we came into the judge's presence, my uncle, after two or three
sea-bows, expressed himself in this manner: -- "Your servant, your servant. --
What cheer, father? what cheer? -- I suppose you don't know me -- may hap you
don't. -- My name is Tom Bowling, -- and this here boy, you look as if you did
not know him neither, -- it is like you may not. -- He Is new-rigged, in faith; --
his cloth don't shake in the wind so much as it wont to do. -- It Is my nephew,
do you see, Roderick Random, -- your own flesh and blood, old gentleman. don't
lag a stern, you dog, don't (pulling me forward)." My grandfather (who was
laidup with the gout) received this relation, after his long absence, with that
civility and coldness which was peculiar to him; told him he was glad to see
him, and desired him to sit down. -- "Thank ye, thank ye, sir, I had as lief
stand, (said my uncle) for my own part, I desire nothing of you; but if you
have any conscience at all, do something for this poor boy, who has been used
at a very unchristian rate. -- Unchristian do I call it? -- I am sure the Moors
in Barbary, have more humanity than to leave their little ones to misery and
want. -- I would fain know, why my sister's son is more neglected than that
there Fair-weather Jack," (pointing to the young 'squire, who with the rest of
my cousins, had followed us into the room.) "Is he not as near akin to you as
the other? -- Is not he much handsomer and better built than that great
chucklehead? -- Come, come, consider, old gentleman, you are going in a short
time, to give an account of your evil actions. -- Remember the wrongs you did
his father; and make all the sati^faction in your power, before it be too late.
-- The least thing you can do, is to settle his father's portion on him." --
The young ladies, who thought themselves too much concerned, to contain
themselves any longer, set up their throats altogether against my protector,
who stopped his ears with his fingers, and cried out, that all the devils in
hell had broke loose upon him. -- "Scurvy companion, -- saucy tarpawlin, --
rude, impertinent fellow, did he think to prescribe to grandpapa -- His
sister's brat had been too well taken care of, -- Grandpapa was too just not to
make a difference between an unnatural rebellious son, and his dutiful loving
children who took his advice in all things;" and such expressions, were
levelled against him with great violence; until the judge at length commanded
silence. -- He calmly rebuked my uncle for his unmannerly behavior, which he
said he would excuse on account of his education: he told him he had been very
kind to the boy, whom he had kept at school seven or eight years, although he
was informed he made no progress in his learning; but was addicted to all
manner of vice, which he the rather believed, because he himself was witness to
a barbarous piece of mischief he had committed on the jaws of his chaplain. --
But however, he would see what the lad was fit for, and bind him apprentice to
some honest tradesman or other, provided he would mend his manners, and behave
for the future, as became him. -- The honest tar (whose pride and indignation
boiled within him) answered my grandfather; that it was true he had sent him to
school, but it had cost him nothing, for he had never been at one shilling
expense, to furnish him with food, raiment, books, or other necessaries; so,
that it was not to be much wondered at, if the boy made small progress; and
yet, whoever told him so, was guilty of a damned lie, for he was allowed by
those who understood those matters, to be the best scholar of his age, in all
the country; the truth of which he would maintain, by laying a wager of his
whole half year's pay on the boy's head; -- (with these words he pulled out his
purse, and challenged the company.) -- Neither is he addicted to vice, as you
affirm, but very much exposed to ill usage, by your neglect, on which
occasions, do you see, he never fails to show his spirit, which has been
misrepresented to you. -- As for what happened to your chaplain, I am only
sorry, that he did not knock out the scoundrel's brains, instead of his teeth.
-- By the Lord, if ever I come up with him, he had better be in Greenland, --
that is all. -- Thank you for your courteous offer, of binding the lad
apprentice to a tradesman, I suppose you would make a tailor of him -- would
you? -- I had rather see him hanged, do you see. -- Come along, Rory, I perceive
how the land lies, my boy, -- let us tack about, in faith, -- while I have a
shilling thou shall not want a tester. -- B'wye, old gentleman, you're bound for
the other world, but I believe damnably ill provided for the voyage. -- Thus
ended our visit, and we returned to the village, my uncle muttering curses all
the way against the old shark and the young fry that surrounded him.

CHAP. IV.
My grandfather makes his will. -- Our second visit -- he dies -- his will is
read in presence of all his living descendants -- the disappointment of my
female cousins -- my uncle's behavior.

A FEW weeks after our first visit, we were informed that the old judge, after
a fit of thoughtfulness, which lasted three days, had sent for a notary and
made his will; that the distemper had mounted from his legs to his stomach, and
being conscious of his approaching end, he had desired to see all his
descendants without exception. -- In obedience to this summons, my uncle set
out with me a second time, to receive the last benediction of my grandfather;
often repeating by the road, "Ey, ey, we have brought up the old hulk at last.
-- You shall see, -- you shall see the effect of my admonition." -- When we
entered his chamber, which was crowded with his relations, we advanced to the
bedside, where we sound him in his last agonies, supported by two of his
grand-daughters, who sat on each side of him, fobbing most piteously, and
wiping away the froth and slaver as it gathered on his lips, which they
frequently kissed with a show of great anguish and affection. -- I know not
whether or not he perceived my uncle, who approached him with these words,
"What! he is not a weigh. -- How fare ye, -- how fare ye, old gentleman? -- Lord
have mercy upon your poor sinful soul." -- But the dying man turned his sunken
eyes toward us, -- when my uncle went on. -- "Here Is poor Rory come to see you
before you die and receive your blessing. -- What man! don't despair, -- you
have been a great sinner, it is true, -- what then? There Is a righteous judge
above, -- is not there? He minds me no more than a porpuss. -- Yes, yes, he is a
going, -- the land crabs will have him, I see that; -- his anchor's a peak, in
faith!" -- This homely consolation scandalized the company so much, and
especially the parson, who probably thought his province invaded, that we were
obliged to retire into another room, where in a few minutes, we were convinced
of my grandfather's decease, by a dismal yell uttered by the young ladies in
his apartment; whither we immediately hastened, and found his heir, who had
retired a little before, into a closet under pretense of giving vent to his
sorrow, asking, with a countenance beslubbered with tears, if his grandpapa was
certainly dead? -- "Dead! (says my uncle, looking at the body) ay, ay, I Will
warrant him as dead as a herring. -- Odd's fish! now my dream is out for all
the world. -- I thought I stood upon the Fore-castle, and saw a parcel of
carrion crows foul of a dead shark that floated alongside, and the devil
perching on our sprit-failyard, in the likeness of a blue bear -- who, do you
see, jumped overboard upon the carcass, and carried it to the bottom in his
claws." -- "Out upon thee, reprobate (cries the parson) out upon thee,
blasphemous wretch! -- Do thou think his honor's soul is in the possession
of Satan?" -- The clamor immediately arose, and my poor uncle, who was
shouldered from one corner of the room to the other, was obliged to lug out in
his own defense, and swear he would turn out for no man, till such time as he
knew who had a title to send him a-drift. -- "None of your tricks upon
travelers (said he;) may hap, old buff has lest my kinsman here, his heir; --
If he has, it will be the better for his miserable soul. -- Odd's bob! I Would
desire no better news. -- I Would soon make a clear ship, I warrant you." -- To
avoid any farther disturbance, one of my grandfather's executors, who was
present, assured Mr. Bowling, that his nephew should have all manner of
justice; that a day should be appointed, after the funeral, for examining the
papers of the deceased, in presence of all his relations; till such time every
desk and cabinet in the house should remain close sealed; and that he was very
welcome to be witness of this ceremony, which was immediately performed to his
satisfaction. -- In the mean time, orders were given to provide mourning for
all the relations, in which number I was included: but my uncle would not
suffer me to accept of it, until I should be assured whether or no I had reason
to honor his memory so far. -- During this interval, the conjectures of
people, with regard to the old gentleman's will, were various: as it was well
known, he had, besides his landed estate, which was worth 700 l. per annum, six
or seven thousand pounds at interest. Some imagined, that the whole real estate
(which he had greatly improved) would go to the young man whom he always
entertained as his heir; and that the money would be equally divided between my
female cousins (five in number) and me. -- Others were of opinion, that as the
rest of his children had been already provided for, he would only bequeath two
or three hundred pounds to each of his grand-daughters, and leave the bulk of
the sum to me, to atone for his unnatural usage toward my father. -- At length
the important hour arrived, and the will was produced in the midst of the
expectants, whose looks and gestures formed a groupe that would have been very
entertaining to an unconcerned spectator. -- But the reader can scarce conceive
the astonishment and mortification that appeared, when an attorney pronounced
aloud, the young 'squire sole heir of all his grandfather's estate personal and
real. -- My uncle, who had listened with great attention, sucking the head of
his cudgel all the while, accompanied these words of the attorney with a stare,
and whew, that alarmed the whole assembly. The eldest and pertest of my female
competitors, who had been always very officious about my grandfather's person,
enquired with a faultering accent, and visage as yellow as an orange, "if there
were no legacies?" she was answered, "none at all." -- Upon which she fainted
away. -- The rest, whose expectations (perhaps) were not so sanguine, supported
their disappointment with more resolution; though not without giving evident
marks of indignation, and grief at least as genuine as that which appeared in
them at the old gentleman's death. My conductor, after having kicked with his
heel for some time against the wainscot, began: "So there is no legacy, friend,
ha! -- here is an old Succubus; -- but somebody's soul howls for it, d -- n me!"
-- The parson of the parish, who was one of the executors, and had acted as
ghostly director of the old man, no sooner heard this, than he cried out,
"Avaunt, unchristian reveler! avaunt! will thou not allow the soul of his
honor to rest in the grave till the resurrection?" -- But this zealous pastor
did not find himself so warmly seconded, as formerly, by the young ladies, who
now joined my uncle against him, and accused him of having acted the part of a
busy-body with their grandpapa, whose ears he had most certainly abused by
false stories to their prejudice, or else he would not have neglected them, in
such an unnatural manner. -- The young 'squire was much diverted with this
scene, and whispered to my uncle, that if he had not murdered his dogs, he
would have shown him glorious sun, by hunting a black badger (so he termed the
clergyman). -- The surly lieutenant, who was not in an humor to relish this
amusement, replied, "you and your dogs may be damned. -- I suppose you will find
them with your old dad, in the latitude of hell. -- Come, Rory -- about ship,
my lad, we must steer another course, I think." -- and away we went.

CHAP. V.
The Schoolmaster uses me barbarously. -- I form a project of revenge, in
which I am assisted by my uncle. -- I leave the village -- am settled at an
university by his generosity.

ON our way back to the village, my uncle spoke not a word during the space of
a whole hour, but whistled with great vehemence, the tune of, Why should we
quarrel for riches, etc. his visage being contracted all the while into a most
formidable srown. At length his pace was increased to such a degree, that I was
often left behind a considerable way, which when he perceived, he would wait
for me; and when I was almost up with him, call out in a surly tone, "Bear a
hand, damme! -- must I bring to every minute for you, you lazy dog." -- Then
laying hold of me by the arm, haul me along, until his good nature (of which he
had a good share) and reflection, getting the better of his passion, he would
say, "Come, my boy, don't be cast down, -- the old rascal is in hell, -- that is
some satisfaction; -- you shall go to sea with me, my lad. -- A light heart and
a thin pair of breeches, goes through the world, brave boys; as the song goes --
eh!" -- Though this proposal did not at all suit my inclination, I was afraid
of discovering my aversion to it, lest I should disoblige the only friend I had
in the world; and he was so much a seaman, that he never dreamt I could have
any objection to his design; consequently, gave himself no trouble in
consulting my approbation. But this resolution was soon dropped, at the advice of
our usher, who assured Mr. Bowling, it would be a thousand pities to baulk my
genius, which would certainly, one day, make my fortune on shore, provided it
received due cultivation. -- Upon which, this generous tar determined (though
he could ill afford it) to give me university education; and accordingly,
settled my board and other expenses, at a town not many miles distant, famous
for its colleges, whither we repaired in a short time. -- But before the day of
our departure, the schoolmaster, who no longer had the fear of my grandfather
before his eyes, laid aside all decency and restraint, and not only abused me
in the grossest language his rancour could suggest, as a wicked profligate,
dull, beggarly miscreant, whom he had taught out of charity; but also inveighed
in the most bitter manner against the memory of the judge (who by the bye had
procured that settlement for him) hinting, in pretty plain terms, that the old
gentleman's soul was damned to all eternity, for his injustice in neglecting to
pay for my learning. -- This brutal behavior, added to the sufferings I had
formerly undergone, made me think it high time to be revenged of this insolent
pedagogue. Having consulted my adherents, I found them all staunch in their
promises to stand by me; and our scheme was this: -- In the afternoon
preceding the day of departure for the university, I was to take the advantage
of the usher's going out to make water (which he regularly did at four o'clock)
and shut the great door, that he might not come to the assistance of his
superior. This being done, the assault was to be begun, by my advancing to the
master and spitting in his face. I was to be seconded by two of the strongest
boys in the school, who were devoted to me; their business was to join me in
dragging the tyrant to a bench, over which he was to be lai^d, and his bare
posteriors heartily flogged with his own birch, which we proposed to wrest from
him in the struggle; but if we should find him too many for us all three, we
were to demand the assistance of our competitors, who should be ready to
reinforce us, or oppose any thing that might be undertaken by the rest of the
boys for the master's relief. One of my principal assistants was called Jeremy
Gawky, son and heir of a wealthy gentleman in the neighborhood; and the name
of the other, Hugh Strap, the cadet of a family which had given shoemakers to
the village time out of mind. -- I had once saved Gawky's life, by plunging
into a river where he was on the point of being drowned, and by the help of
swimming, dragging him ashore; I had often rescued him from the clutches of
those whom his insufferable arrogance had provoked, to a resentment he was not
able to sustain; -- and I had many times saved his reputation and posteriors,
by performing his exercises at school; so that it is not to be wondered at, if
he had a particular regard for me and my interests. The attachment of Strap,
flowed from a voluntary, disinterested inclination, which had manifested itself
on many occasions in my behalf, having once rendered me the same service as I
had afforded to Gawky, by saving my life at the risk of his own; and often
fathered offenses I had committed, for which he suffered severely, rather than
I should feel the the weight of the punishment I deserved. -- These two
champions were the more willing to engage in this enterprise, as they intended
to leave the school next day, as well as I; the first being ordered by his
father to return into the country, and the other being bound apprentice to a
barber, at a market town not far off.

In the mean time, my uncle being informed of my master's behavior to me, was
enraged beyond all composition, and vowed revenge so heartily, that I could not
refrain from telling him the scheme I had concerted, which he heard with great
satisfaction, at every sentence squirting out a mouthful of spittle, tinctured
with tobacco, of which he constantly chewed a large quid. -- At last, pulling
up his breeches, he cried, "No, no, Z -- ds! that will not do neither, --
howsomever, it is a bold undertaking, my lad, -- that I must say, in faith! --
but lookee, lookee, how do propose to get clear off? -- will not the enemy give
chase, my boy? -- ay, ay, that he will, I warrant -- and alarm the whole coast
-- ah! G -- d help thee, more sail than ballast, Rory. -- Let me alone for that
-- leave the whole to me -- I Will show him the foretop-sail, I will. -- If so be
that your ship-mates are jolly boys, and will not flinch, you shall see, you shall
see; egad, I Will play him a salt water trick -- I Will bring him to the gang-way,
and anoint him with a cat and nine tails, -- he shall have a round dozen
doubled, my lad, he shall -- and be left lashed, to his meditations." -- We
were very proud of our associate, who immediately went to work, and prepared
the instrument of his revenge with great skill and expedition; after which, he
ordered our baggage to be packed up and sent off, a day before our attempt, and
got horses ready to be mounted, as soon as the affair should be over. At length
the hour arrived, when our auxiliary, seizing the opportunity of the usher's
absence, bolted in, secured the door, and immediately laid hold of the pedant
by his collar, who bawled out "Murder! Thieves!" -- with the voice of a
stentor. Though I trembled all over like an aspenleas, I knew there was no time
to be lost, and accordingly got up, and summoned our associates to my
assistance. -- Strap without any hesitation obeyed the signal, and seeing me
leap upon the master's back, ran immediately to one of his legs, which pulling
with all his force, this dreadful adversary was soon humbled to the ground;
upon which Gawky, who had hitherto remained in his place, under the influence
of an universal trepidation, hastened to the scene of action, and insulted the
fallen tyrant with a loud huzza, in which the whole school joined. -- This
noise alarmed the usher, who finding himself shut out, endeavored, partly by
threats, and partly by entreaties, to procure admission. -- My uncle bid him
have a little patience, and he would let him in presently; but if he pretended
to move from that place, it should fare the worse with the son of a b -- ch his
superior, on whom he intended only to bestow a little wholesome chastifement,
for his barbarous usage of Rory, "to which (said he) you are no stranger." --
By this time we had dragged the criminal to a post, to which Bowling tied him
with a rope he had provided on purpose, after having fastened his hands behind
his back, pulled down his breeches, and tucked up his garments and shirt, as
far as they would go -- In this ludicrous posture he stood (to the no small
entertainment of the boys, who crowded about him, and shouted with great
exultation at the novelty of the sight) venting bitter imprecations against the
lieutenant, and reproaching his scholars with treachery and rebellion: when the
usher was admitted, whom my uncle accosted in this manner: "Harkee, Mr. Syntax,
I believe you are an honest man, do you see -- and I have a respect for you --
but for all that, we must for our own security (do you see) belay you for a short
time." -- With these words, he pulled out some fathoms of cord, which the
honest man no sooner saw, than he protested with great earnestness, that he
would allow no violence to be offered to him, at the same time accusing me of
perfidy and ingratitude. But Bowling representing, that it was in vain to
resist, and that he did not mean to use him with violence and indecency; but
only to hinder him from raising the hue and cry against us, before we should be
out of their power; he allowed himself to be bound to his own desk, where he
sat a spectator of the punishment inflicted on his principal. My uncle having
unbraided this arbitrary wretch with his inhumanity to me, told him, that he
proposed to give him a little discipline for the good of his soul: which he
immediately put in practice, with great vigor and dexterity. This smart
application to the pedant's withered pofteriors, gave him such exquisite pain,
that he roared like a mad bull, danced, cursed, blasphemed, and acted to the
life, the part of a frantic bedlamite. When the lieutenant thought himself
sufficiently revenged, he took his leave of him in these words, "Now, friend,
you will remember me the longest day you have to live -- I have given you a
lesson, that will let you know what flogging is, and teach you to have more
sympathy for the future -- shout, boys, shout." -- This ceremony was no sooner
over, than my uncle proposed they should quit the school, and convoy their old
comrade Rory to a public house, about a mile from the village, where he would
treat them all. -- This offer being joyfully embraced, he addressed himself to
Mr Syntax, and begged him to accompany us, which he refused with great disdain,
telling my benefactor, that he was not the man he took him to be -- "Well,
well, old surly (replied my uncle, shaking his hand) thou art an honest fellow
notwithstanding; and if ever I have the command of a ship, thou shall be school
master, in faith." So saying, he dismissed the boys, and locking the door, left
the two preceptors to console one another; while we moved forwards on our
journey, attended by a numerous retinue, whom he treated according to his
promise. -- We parted with many tears, and lay that night at an inn on the
road, about ten miles short of the town where I was to remain, at which we
arrived next day, and I found I had no cause to complain of the accommodations
provided for me; being boarded at the house of an apothecary, who had married a
distant relation of my mother. In a few days after, my uncle set out for his
ship, after having settled the necessary funds for my maintenance and education.

CHAP. VI.
I make great progress in my studies -- am caressed by every body -- my female
cousins take notice of me -- I reject their invitation -- they are incensed and
conspire against me -- I am left destitute by a misfortune that befalls my uncle
-- Gawky's treachery -- my revenge.

AS I was now capable of reflection, I began to consider my precarious
situation; that I was utterly abandoned by those whose duty it was to protect
me; and that my sole dependence was on the generosity of one man, who was not
only exposed by his profession, to continual dangers, which might one day
deprive me of him for ever; but also (no doubt) subject to those vicissitudes
of disposition, which a change of fortune usually creates; or, which a better
acquaintance with the world might produce: -- for I always ascribed his
benevolence to the dictates of a heart as yet undebauched by a commerce with
mankind. -- Alarmed at these considerations, I resolved to apply myself with
great care to my studies, and enjoy the opportunity in my power: This I did
with such success, that in the space of three years, I understood Greek very
well, was pretty far advanced in the mathematics, and no stranger to moral and
natural philosophy: logic I made no account of; but above all things, I valued
myself on my taste in the Belle Lettre, and a talent for poetry, which had
already produced some morceaus, that brought me a great deal of reputation.
These qualifications added to a good face and shape, acquired the esteem and
acquaintance of the most considerable people in town, and I had the
satisfaction to find myself in some degree of favor with the ladies; an
intoxicating piece of good fortune, to one of my amorous complexion! which I
obtained, or at least preserved, by gratifying their propensity to scandal, in
lampooning their rivals. -- Two of my female cousins lived in this place, with
their mother, after the death of their father, who left his whole fortune
(which was considerable) equally divided between them; so that if they were not
the most beautiful, they were at least the richest toasts in town; and received
daily the addresses of all the beaux and cavaliers of the country. -- Although
I had hitherto been looked upon by them with the most supercilious contempt,
which I endeavored to return by the most perfect neglect, my character now
attracted their notice so much, that I was given to understand, I might be
honored with their acquaintance, if I pleased. -- The reader will easily
perceive, that this condescension either flowed from the hope of making my
poetical capacity subservient to their malice, or at least of screening
themselves from the lash of my resentment, which they effectually provoked. --
I enjoyed this triumph with great rapture; and not only rejected their offer
with disdain, but, in all my performances, whether satire or panegyric,
industriously avoided mentioning their names, even while I celebrated those of
their intimates, which mortified their pride exceedingly, and incensed them to
such a degree, that they rendered themselves universally ridiculous in
satisfying their resentment against me. -- The first stroke of their revenge
consisted in their hiring a poor collegian to write verses against me, the
subject of which was my own poverty, and the catastrophe of my unhappy parents;
but besides the badness of the composition (of which they themselves were
ashamed) they did not find their account in endeavoring to reproach me with
those misfortunes, which they and their relations had intailed upon me; and
which consequently, reflected much more dishonor on themselves, than on me,
who was the innocent victim of their barbarity and avarice. -- Finding this
plan miscarry, they found means to irritate a young gentleman against me, by
telling him I had lampooned his mistress; and so effectually succeeded in the
quality of incendiaries, that this enraged lover determined to seize me next
night, as I returned to my lodgings from a friend's house that I frequented;
with this view, he waited in the street, attended by two of his companions, to
whom he had imparted his design of carrying me down to the river, in which he
proposed to have me heartily ducked, notwithstanding the severity of the
weather, it being then about the middle of December. -- But this stratagem did
not succeed; for, being apprised of their ambush, I got home another way, and
by the help of my landlord's apprentice, emptied a close stool out of the
garret window, which did great execution upon them; and next day, occasioned so
much mirth at their expense, that they found themselves under a necessity of
leaving the town, until the adventure should be entirely forgotten. -- My
cousins (though twice baffled in their expectation) did not however, desist
from persecuting me, who had now enraged them beyond a possibility of
forgiveness, by detecting their malice, and preventing its effects: neither
would I have found them more humane, had I patiently submitted to their
rancour, and bore without murmuring the rigor of their unreasonable hate; for,
I have found by experience, that though small favors may be acknowledged, and
slight injuries atoned, there is no wretch so ungrateful as he, whom you have
most generously obliged; and no enemy so implacable, as those who have done you
most wrong. -- These good-natured creatures, therefore, had recourse to a
scheme which conspired with a piece of bad news I soon after received, to give
them all the satisfaction they desired: this plan was to debauch the faith of
my companion and confident, and prevail on him to betray the trust I reposed in
him, by imparting to them the particulars of my small amors, which they
published with such exaggerations, that I suffered very much in the opinion of
every body, and was utterly discarded, by the dear creatures whose names had
been called in question. -- While I was busied in tracing out the author of
this treachery, that I might not only be revenged on him, but also vindicate my
character to my friends; I one day, perceived the looks of my landlady so
altered, when I went home to dinner, that upon enquiring into the cause, she
screwed up her mouth, and fixing her eyes on the ground, told me her husband
had received a letter from Mr. Bowling, with one enclosed for me -- she was
very sorry for what had happened, both for my sake, and his own -- People
should be more cautious of their cnoduct -- she was always afraid his brutal
behavior would bring him into some misfortune or other. -- As for her part,
she would be very ready to befriend me; but she had a small family of her own
to maintain. -- The world would do nothing for her if she should come to want
-- charity begins at home. -- She wished I had been bound to some substantial
handicraft, such as a weaver or shoemaker, rather than loiter away my time in
learning foolish nonsense that would never bring me in a penny -- but some
folks are wise, and some are otherwise -- I was listening to this mysterious
discourse, with great amazement, when her husband entered, and without speaking
a syllable, put both the letters into my hand. -- I received them trembling,
and read what follows:

To ROGER POTION.
SIR,
THIS is to let you know that I have quitted the Thunder man of war; being
obliged to sheer off, for killing my captain, which I did fairly on the beach,
at Cape Tiberoon, in the island of Hispaniola; having received his fire, and
returned it, which went through his body: -- and I would serve the best man so
that ever stepped between stem and stern, if so be that he struck me, as captain
Oakhum, did. I am (thank God) safe among the French, who are very civil, thof I
don't understand their lingo, -- and I hope to be restored in a little time,
for all the great friends and parliamentary interest of the captain, for I have
sent home to my landlord in Deal, an account of the whole affair, with our
bearings and distances while we were engaged, whereby I have desired him to lay
it before his majesty, who (G -- d bless him) will not suffer an honest tar to
be wronged. -- My love to your spouse, and am

Your loving friend, and servant to command, while Thomas Bowling.


To RODERICK RANDOM.
Dear RORY,
DON'T be grieved at my misfortune -- but mind your book, my lad. I have got no
money to send you; but what of that? -- Mr. Potion will take care of you, for
the love he bears to me; and let you want for nothing, and it shall go hard,
but I will see him one day repaid. -- No more at present, but rests

Your dutiful uncle and servant, till death, Thomas Eowling.


This letter (which with the other was dated from Port Lou's in Hispaniola) was
no sooner read, than the apothecary shaking his head, began: -- "I have a very
great regard for Mr. Bowling, that is certain, -- and could be well content --
but times are very hard. -- There Is no such thingas money to be got -- I
believe it is all vanished underground, for my part. -- Besides, I have been
out of pocket already, having entertained you since the beginning of this
month, without receiving a sixpence, -- and G -- d knows if ever I shall; --
for I believe it will go hard with your uncle. -- And more than that, I was
thinking of giving you warning, for I want your apartment for a new 'prentice,
whom I expect from the country every hour. -- So, I desire you will this week
provide yourself with another lodging." -- The indignation which this harangue
inspired, gave me spirits to support my reverse of fortune; and to tell him, I
despised his mean, selfish disposition so much, that I would rather starve than
be beholden to him for one single meal. Upon which, out of my pocket-money, I
paid him to the last farthing of what I owed, and assured him, I would not
sleep another night under his roof. -- This said, I sallied out, in a transport
of rage and sorrow, without knowing whither to fly for shelter, having not one
friend in the world capable of relieving me, and only three shillings in my
purse. -- After giving way for a few minutes to the dictates of my rage, I went
and hired a small bed-room at the rate of one shilling and sixpence per week,
which I was obliged to pay per-advance, before the landlord would receive me;
hither I removed my luggage; and next morning got up, with a view of craving
the advice and assistance of a person who had on all occasions, loaded me with
caresses, and made frequent offers of friendship, while I was under no
necessity of accepting them. -- He received me with his wonted affability, and
insisted on my breakfasting with him, which I did not think fit to refuse. --
But when I communicated the occasion of my visit, he appeared so disconcerted,
that I concluded him wonderfully affected with the misery of my condition, and
looked upon him as a man of the most extensive sympathy and benevolence. -- He
did no leave me long under this mistake; for recovering himself out of his
confusion, he told me, he was grieved at my misfortune, and desired to know
what had passed between my landlord Mr. Potion and me. Whereupon I recounted
the conversation; and when I repeated the answer I made to his ungenerous
remonstrance with regard to my leaving his house, this pretended friend
affected a stare, and exclaimed, "Is it possible you could behave so ill to the
man who had treated you so kindly all along?" -- My surprise at hearing this,
was not at all affected, whatever his might be; and I gave him to understand,
with some warmth, that I did not imagine he would so unreasonably espouse the
cause of a scoundrel, who ought to be expelled from every social community. --
This heat of mine, gave him all the advantage he desired over me, and our
discourse (after much altercation) concluded in his desiring never to see me
again in that place; to which I yielded my consent, assuring him, that had I
been as well acquainted with his principles formerly as I was now, he never
should have had an opportunity to make that request. -- And thus we parted.

On my return, I met my old comrade 'squire Gawky, whom his father had sent,
some time ago, to town, for his improvement in writing, dancing, fencing; and
to see the world. As I had lived with him, since his arrival, on the footing of
our old intimacy, I made no scruple of informing him of the lowness of my
circumstances, and asking a small supply of money, to answer my present
expense; upon which he pulled out an handful of halfpence with a shilling or
two among them, and swore that was all he had to keep his pocket till next
quarter day; having lost the greatest part of his allowance the night before at
billiards. Though this might very well be true, I was extremely mortified at
his indifference; for he neither discovered any sympathy for my mishap, nor
desire of alleviating my distress; and accordingly, I left him without uttering
one word: But when I afterward understood, that he was the person who had
formerly betrayed me to the malice of my cousins, to whom likewise he had
carried the tidings of my forlorn situation, which afforded them great matter
of triumph and exultation, I determined with myself to call him to a severe
account; for which purpose, I borrowed a sword, and wrote a challenge, desiring
him to meet me at a certain time and place, that I might have an opportunity of
punishing his perfidy, at the expense of his blood. -- He accepted the
invitation, and I betook myself to the field, though not without feeling
considerable repugnance to the combat, which frequently attacked me in cold
sweats by the way; -- but the desire of revenge, the shame of retracting, and
hope of conquest, conspired to repel these unmanly symptoms of fear; and I
appeared on the plain with a good grace: there I waited an hour beyond the time
appointed, and was not ill pleased to find he had no mind to meet me; because
now I should have an opportunity of exposing his cowardice, displaying my own
courage, and of beating him soundly wheresoever I should find him, without any
dread of the consequence. -- Elevated with these suggestions, which entirely
banished all thoughts of my deplorable condition, I went directly to Gawky's
lodgings, where I was informed of his precipitate retreat, he having set out
for the country in less than an hour after he had received my billet. --
Whereupon, I was vain enough to have the whole story inserted in the news,
although I was fain to sell a gold-laced hat to my landlord, for less than
half-price, to defray the expense, and contribute to my subsistence.

CHAP. VII.
I am entertained by Mr. Crab -- a description of him -- I acquire the art of
surgery -- consult Crab's disposition -- become necessary to him -- an accident
happens -- he advises me to launch out into the world -- assists me with money
-- I set out for London.

THE fumes of my resentment being dissipated, as well as the vanity of my
success, I found myself deserted to all the horrors of extreme want, and
avoided by mankind as a creature of a different species, or rather as a
solitary being, no ways comprehended within the scheme or protection of
providence. My despair had rendered me almost quite stupefied, when I was one
day told, that a gentleman desired to see me, at a certain public house,
whither immediately I repaired; and was introduced to one Mr. Lancelot Crab a
surgeon in town, who was engaged with two more, in drinking a liquor called
pop-in, composed by tossing a quartern of brandy into a quart of small beer. --
Before I relate the occasion of this message, I believe it will not be
disagreeable to the reader, if I describe the gentleman who sent for me, and
mention some circumstances of his character and conduct, which may illustrate
what follows, and account for his behavior to me.

This member of the faculty was aged fifty, about five foot high, and ten round
the belly; his face was capacious as a full moon, and much of the complexion of
a mulberry: his nose resembling a powder-horn, was swelled to an enormous size,
and studded all over with carbuncles; and his little gray eyes reflected the
rays in such an oblique manner, that while he looked a person full in the face,
one would have imagined he was admiring the buckle of his shoe. -- He had long
entertained an implacable resentment against Potion, who, though a younger
practitioner, had engrossed more business than he, and once had the assurance
to perform a cure, whereby he disappointed and disgraced the prognostic of the
said Crab. -- This quarrel, which was at one time upon the point of being made
up, by the interposition and mediation of friends, had been lately inflamed
beyond a possibility of reconciliation by the respective wives of the
opponents, who, chancing to meet at a christening, disagreed about precedence,
proceeded from invectives to blows, and were with great difficulty, by the
gossips, prevented from converting the occasion of joy, into a seen of blood.

The difference between these rivals was in the height of rancour, when I was
sent for by Crab, who received me as civilly as I could have expected from one
of his disposition; and after desiring me to sit, enquired into the particulars
of my leaving the house of Potion; which when I had related, he said with a
malicious grin, -- "Here Is a sneaking dog! -- I always thought him a fellow
without a soul, d -- n me! -- a canting scoundrel, who has crept into business
by his hypocrisy, and kissing the a -- se of every body." -- "Ay, ay, (says
another) one might see with half an eye, that the rascal has no honesty in him,
by his going so regulary to church." This sentence was confirmed by the third,
who assured his companions, that Potion was never known to be disguised in
liquor but once, at a meeting of the godly, where he had distinguished himself
by an extempore prayer an hour long. -- After this preamble, Crab addressed
himself to me in these words, "Well, my lad, I have heard a good character of
you, and I Will do for you. -- You may send your things to my house when you
please. -- I have given orders for your reception. -- Z -- ds! what does the
booby stare at? -- If you have no mind to embrace my courteous offer, you may
let it alone and be d -- n'd." -- I answered with a submissive bow, that I was
far from rejecting his friendly offer, of which I would immediately avail
myself, as soon as he should inform me, on what footing I should be
entertained. -- "What footing (d -- n my blood, cried he) do you expect to have a
footman and couple of horses kept for you?" -- No, Sir (I replied) my
expectations are not quite so sanguine. -- That I may be as little burdensome
as possible, I would willingly serve in your shop, by which means I may save
you the expense of a journey-man, or porter at least, for I understand a little
pharmacy, having employed some of my leisure hours in the practice of that art,
while I lived with Mr. Potion: neither am I altogether ignorant of surgery,
which I have studied with great pleasure and application. -- "O ho! you did
(says Crab) Gentlemen, here is a complete artist! -- Studied surgery! what? in
books I suppose. -- I shall have you disputing with me, one of these days, on
points of my profession. -- You can already account for muscular motion (I
warrant) and explain the mystery of the brain and nerves -- ha! -- You are too
learned for me, d -- n me. -- But let us hear no more of this stuff, -- can you
bleed and give a clyster, spread a plaster and prepare a potion? answer me to
that." -- Upon my answering him in the affirmative, he shook his head, telling
me, he believed he should have little good of me, for all my promises; -- but
however, he would take me in for the sake of charity. -- I was accordingly that
very night admitted to his house, and had an apartment assigned to me in the
garret, which I was fain to put up with, notwithstanding the mortification my
pride suffered in this change of circumstances. I was soon convinced of the
real motives which induced Crab to receive me in this manner: for besides the
gratification of his revenge, in exposing the selfishness of his antagonist, in
opposition to his own generosity, which was all affectation, he had occasion
for a young man who understood something of the profession, to fill up the
place of his eldest apprentice, lately dead, not without violent suspicion of
foul play from his master's brutality. -- The knowledge of this, together with
his daily behavior to his wife, and the young apprentice, did not at all
contribute to my enjoying my new situation with ease; however, as I did not
perceive how I could bestow myself to better advantage, I resolved to study
Crab's temper with all the application, and manage it with all the address I
was master of. -- And it was not long before I found out a strange peculiarity
of humor, which governed his behavior toward all his dependants. -- I
observed when he was pleased, he was such a niggard of his satisfaction, that
if his wife or servants betrayed the least symptom of participation, he was
offended to an insupportable degree of choler and fury, the effects of which
they seldom failed to feel. -- And when his indignation was roused, submission
and soothing always exasperated it beyond the bounds of reason and humanity. --
I therefore pursued a contrary plan; and one day, when he honored me with the
names of ignorant whelp and lazy ragamuffin -- I boldly replied, I was neither
ignorant nor lazy, since I both understood, and performed my business as well
as he could do for his soul: neither was it just to call me ragamuffin, for I
had a whole coat on my back, and was descended from a better family than any he
could boast an alliance with. He gave tokens of great amazement at this
assurance of mine, and shook his cane over my head, regarding me all the time
with a countenance truly diabolical Although I was terribly startled at his
menacing looks and posture, I yet had reflection enough left, to convince me, I
had gone too far to retract, and that this was the critical minute which must
decide my future lot, in his service; whereupon I snatched up the pestle of a
mortar, and swore if he offered to strike me without cause, I would see whether
his scull or my weapon was hardest. -- He continued silent for some time, and
at last broke forth into these ejaculations, -- "This is fine usage from a
servant to a master, -- very fine! -- damnation! -- but, no matter, you shall
pay for this; you dog, you shall. -- I Will do your business -- yes, yes, I Will
teach you to lift your hand against me." -- So saying, he retired and left me
under dreadful apprehensions, which vanished entirely at our next meeting, when
he behaved with unusual complacency, and treated me with a glass of punch after
dinner. -- By this conduct, I got the ascendency over him in a short time, and
became so necessary to him, in managing his business while he was engaged at
the bottle, that fortune began to wear a kinder aspect with regard to me; and I
consoled myself for the disregard of my former acquaintance, with the knowledge
I daily imbibed, by a close application to the duties of my employment, in
which I succeeded beyond my own expectation. -- I was on very good terms with
my master's wife, whose esteem I acquired and cultivated, by representing Mrs.
Potion in the most ridiculous lights my satirical talents could invent, as well
as by rendering her some christian offices, when she had been too familiar with
the dram bottle, to which she had often times recourse for consolation, under
the affliction she suffered from a barbarous husband. -- In this manner I
lived, without hearing the least tidings of my uncle, for the space of two
years, during which time I kept little or no company, being neither in a humor
to relish, nor in a capacity to maintain much acquaintance: for the Nabal my
master allowed me no wages; and the small perquisites of my station scarce
supplied me with the common necessaries of life. -- I was no longer, a pert,
unthinking coxcomb, giddy with popular applause, and elevated with the
extravagance of hope; my misfortunes had taught me how little the caresses of
the world during a man's prosperity, are to be valued by him; and how seriously
and expeditiously he ought to set himself about making himself independent of
them. My present appearance, therefore, was the least of my care, which was
wholly engrossed in laying up a stock of instruction that might secure me
against the caprice of fortune for the future. I became such a sloven, and
contracted such an air of austerity, that every body pronounced me
crest-fallen; and Gawky returned to town without running any risk from my
resentment, which was by this time pretty much cooled, and restrained by
prudential reasons, so effectually, that I never so much as thought of
obtaining satisfaction for the injuries he had done me. -- When I deemed myself
sufficiently master of my business, I began to cast about for an opportunity of
launching into the world, in hopes of finding some provision, that might make
amends for the difficulties I had undergone: but, as this could not be effected
without a small sum of money to equip me for the field, I was in the utmost
perplexity how to raise it, well knowing, that Crab, for his own sake, would
never put me in a condition to leave him, when his interest was so much
concerned in my stay. -- But a small accident, which happened about this time,
determined him in my favor. This was no other than the pregnancy of his maid
servant, who declared her situation to me, assuring me at the same time, that I
was the occasion of it. Although I had no reason to question the truth of this
imputation, I was not ignorant of the familiarities which had passed between
her master and her; of which availing myself, I represented to her the folly of
laying the burden at my door; when she might dispose of it to much greater
advantage with Mr. Crab: She listened to my advice, and next day acquainted him
with the pretended success of their mutual endeavor. -- He was far from being
over-joyed at this proof of his vigor, which he foresaw might have very
troublesome consequences; not that he dreaded any domestic grumblings and
reproaches from his wife, whom he kept in perfect subjection; but because he
knew it would furnish his rival Potion with a handle for insulting and
undermining his reputation, there being no scandal equal to that of
uncleanness, in the opinion of those who inhabit that part of the island where
he lived. -- He therefore took a resolution worthy of himself, which was, to
persuade the girl, that she was not with child, but only afflicted with a
disorder incident to young women, which he could easily remove: with this view
(as he pretended) he prescribed for her such medicines, as he thought would
infallibly procure abortion; but in this he was disappointed, for the maid
being advertised by me of his design, and at the same time well satisfied with
her own condition, absolutely refused to follow his directions; and threatened
to publish her situation to the world, if he did not immediately take some
method of providing for the important occasion, which she expected in a few
months. -- It was not long before I guessed the result of his deliberation, by
his addressing himself to me (one day) in this manner: "I am surprised, that a
young fellow like you, discovers no inclination to push his fortune in the
world. -- By G -- d, before I was of your age, I was broiling on the coast of
Guinea. -- Damme! what is to hinder you from profiting by the war, which will
certainly be declared in a short time against Spain? -- You may easily get on
board of a king's ship in quality of a surgeon's mate, where you will certainly
see a great deal of practice, and stand a good chance of getting prize money."
-- I laid hold of this declaration, which I had long wished for, and assured
him I would follow his advice with pleasure, if it was in my power; but that it
was impossible for me, to embrace an opportunity of that kind, having no friend
to advance a little money, to supply me with what necessaries I should want,
and defray the expenses of my journey to London. -- He told me, that few
necessaries were required; and as for the expense of my journey, he would lend
me money, not only for that purpose, but also to maintain me comfortably in
London, until I should procure a warrant for my provision aboard ship. -- I
gave him a thousand thanks for his obliging offer (although I was very well
apprized of his motive, which was to make his chambermaid lay the child to me
after I was gone; and accordingly set out in a few weeks for London; my whole
fortune consisting of one suit of clothes, half a dozen ruffled shirts, as many
plain, two pair worsted stockings, as many thread; a case of pocket
instruments, a small edition of Horace, Wiseman's surgery, and ten guineas in
cash; for which Crab took my bond, bearing 5 per cent. interest; at the same
time giving me a letter to the member of parliament for our town, which he said
would do my business.

CHAP. VIII.
I arrive at Newcastle -- meet with my old school-fellow Strap -- we determine
to walk in company to London -- set out on our journey -- put up at a solitary
alehouse -- are disturbed by a strange adventure in the night.

THERE is no such convenience as a wagon in this country, and my finances were
too weak to support the expense of hiring a horse; I determined therefore to
set out with the carriers, who transport goods from one place to another on
horseback, this I accordingly put in execution, on the first day of November
1739, sitting upon a pack-saddle between two baskets; one of which contained my
goods in a knapsack. But by the time we arrived at Newcastle upon Tyne, I was
so fatigued with the tediousness of the carriage, and benumbed with the
coldness of the weather, that I resolved to travel the rest of my journey on
soot, rather than proceed in such a disagreeable manner.

The hostler of the inn at which we put up, understanding I was bound for
London, advised me to take my passage in a collier, which would be both cheap
and expeditious, and withal much easier than to walk upwards of three hundred
miles through deep roads, in the winter time; which he believed I had not
strength enough to perform. -- I was almost persuaded to take his advice, when,
one day, stepping into a barber's shop to be shaved, the young man, while he
lathered my face, accosted me thus: "Sir, I presume you are a Scotchman." To
which I answered in the affirmative. -- "Pray (continued he) of what part of
Scotland?" -- I no sooner told him, than he discovered great emotion, and not
confining his operation to my chin and upper lip, besmeared my whole face with
great agitation. -- At which I was so offended, that starting up, I asked him
what the d -- I he meant by using me so? -- He begged pardon, telling me his
joy in meeting with a countryman, had occasioned some confusion in him; and
craved my name. -- But when I declared my name was Random he exclaimed in a
rapture, "How! Rory Random?" The same, I replied, looking at him with
astonishment; "What, cried he, don't you know your old school-fellow, Hugh
Strap?" At that instant recollecting his face, I flew into his arms, and in the
transport of my joy, gave him back one half of the suds he had so lavishly
bestowed on my countenance; so that we made a very ludicrous appearance, and
furnished a great deal of mirth to his master and shop-mates, who were
witnesses of this scene. -- When our mutual caresses were over, I sat down
again to be shaved, but the poor fellow's nerves were so discomposed by this
unexpected meeting, that his hand could scarcely hold the razor, with which
(nevertheless) he found means to cut me in three places, in as many strokes.
His master, perceiving his disorder, bid another supply his place; and after
the operation was performed, gave Strap leave to pass the rest of the day with
me. -- We retired immediately to my lodgings, where calling for some beer, I
desired to be informed of his adventures, which contained nothing more, than
that his master dying before his time was out, he had come to Newcastle about a
year ago, in expectation of journey-work, along with three young fellows of his
acquaintance who worked in the keels; that he had the good fortune of being
employed by a very civil master, with whom he intended to stay till the spring,
at which time he proposed to go to London, where he did not doubt of finding
encouragement. -- When I communicated to him my situation and design, he did
not approve of my taking a passage by sea, by reason of the danger of a winter
voyage, which is very hazardous along that coast, as well as the precariousness
of the wind, which might possibly detain me a great while, to the no small
detriment of my fortune: whereas, if I would venture by land, he would bear me
company, carry my baggage as well as his own, all the way; and if we should
find ourselves fatigued, it would be no hard matter for us to find on the road,
either return-horses or wagons, of which we might take the opportunity for a
very trifling expense. -- I was so ravished at this proposal, that I embraced
him affectionately, and assured him he might command my purse to the last
farthing; but he gave me to understand, he had saved money sufficient to answer
his own occasions; and that he had a friend in London, who would soon introduce
him into business, in that capital; and might possibly have it in his power to
serve me like wise.

Having concerted our plan and settled our affairs that night, we departed next
morning by daybreak, armed with a good cudgel each, my companion being charged
with the furniture of us both, crammed into one knapsack, which he carried
after the manner of soldiers on a march; and our money sewed between the lining
and wastband of our breeches, except some loose silver for our immediate
expense on the road. -- We traveled all day at a round pace, but being
ignorant of the proper stages, we were benighted at a good distance from any
inn, which compelled us to take up our lodging at a small hedge alehouse, that
stood by itself on a by-road, about half a mile from the highway: There we
found a pedlar of our own country, in whose company we regaled ourselves with
bacon and eggs and a glass of good ale, before a comfortable fire, conversing
all the while very sociably with the landlord and his daughter, an hale buxome
lass, who entertained us with great good humor, and in whose affection I was
vain enough to believe I had made some progress. -- About eight a clock, we
were all three, at our own desire, shown into an apartment, where were two
beds, in one of which Strap and I betook ourselves to rest, and the pediar
occupied the other, though not before he had prayed a considerable time
extempore; searched into every corner of the room, and fastened the door on the
inside with a strong iron screw, which he carried about with him for that use.
-- I slept very sound till midnight, when I was disturbed by a violent motion
of the bed, which shook under me with a continual tremor. -- Alarmed at this
phoenomenon, I jogged my companion, whom to my no small amazement, I found
drenched in sweat, and quaking through every limb; he told me with a low
faultering voice, that we were undone; for there was a bloody highwayman loaded
with pistols, in the next room; then, bidding me make as little noise as
possible, he directed me to a small chink in the board partition, through which
I could see a thick set brawny sellow, with a fierce countenance, sitting at a
table in company with our young landlady, having a bottle of ale and a brace of
pistols before them. -- I listened with great attention, and heard him say in a
terrible tone: "D -- n that son of a b -- h, Smack the coachman! -- he has
served me a fine trick, indeed! -- but d -- tion seize me, if I don't make him
repent it! -- I Will teach the scoundrel to give intelligence to others, while he
is under articles with me." -- Our landlady endeavored to appease this
exasperated robber, by saying, that he might possibly be mistaken in Smack, who
perhaps kept no correspondence with the other gentleman that robbed his coach,
-- and that if an accident had disappointed him to day, he might soon find
opportunities enough to atone for his lost trouble. -- "I Will tell thee what, my
dear Bett (replied he) I never had, nor never will, while my name is Rifle,
have such a glorious booty as I missed today. -- Z -- ds! there was 400 l. in
cash to recruit men for the king's service, besides the jewels, watches,
swords, and money belonging to the passengers; -- had it been my fortune to
have got clear off with so much treasure, I would have purchased a commission
in the army, and made you an officer's lady, you jade, I would." -- "Well, well
(cries Betty) we must trust to providence for that; -- but did you find nothing
worth taking, which escaped the other adventurer?" -- "Not much, says (said
the lover;) I gleaned a few things, -- such as a pair of pops, silvermounted
(here they are) I took them loaded out of the pockets of the captain who had
the charge of the money, together with a gold watch, which he had concealed in
his breeches. -- I likewise found ten Portugal pieces in the shoes of a quaker,
whom the spirit moved to revile me with great bitterness and devotion; but what
I value myself mostly for, is this here purchase, a gold snuff box, my girl,
with a young gentleman's picture on the inside of the lid: which I untied out
of the tail of a pretty lady's smock." -- Here, as the devil would have it, the
pedlar snored so loud, that the highwayman snatching his pistols, started up,
crying, "Hell and d -- n -- n! I am betrayed, -- who is that in the next room?"
Mrs. Betty told him, he need not be uneasy, there were only three poor wearied
travelers, who, mistaking the road, had taken up their lodging there, and were
asleep long ago. -- "Travelers! says he, spies, you b -- ch! but no matter --
by G -- d, I Will send them all to hell in an instant." -- He accordingly run
toward our door; when his sweetheart interposing, assured him, there was only
a couple of poor young Scotchmen, who were too raw and ignorant to give him the
least cause of suspicion; and the third was a Presbyterian pedlar of the same
nation, who had often lodged in the house before. -- This declaration satisfied
the thief, who swore he was glad there was a pedlar there, for he wanted some
linen. -- Then in a jovial manner, he put about the glass, mingling his
discourse to Betty, with caresses and familiarities, that spoke him very happy
in his amors. During that part of the conversation which regarded us, Strap
had crept under the bed, where he lay without sense or motion, so that it was
with great difficulty I persuaded him our danger was over, and prevailed on him
to wake the pedlar, and inform him of what we had seen and heard -- This
itinerant merchant no sooner felt somebody shaking him by the shoulder, than he
started up, calling as loud as he could, -- "Thieves, thieves! -- L -- d have
mercy on us." Rifle, alarmed at this exclamation, jumped up, cocked one of his
pistols, and turned toward the door to kill the first man who should enter;
for he verily believed himself beset; when his Dulcinea, after an immoderate
fit of laughter, persuaded him, that the poor pedlar dreaming of thieves, had
only cried out in his sleep. -- Meanwhile my comrade had undeceived our
fellowlodger, and informed him of his reason for disturbing him; upon which,
getting up softly he peeped through the hole, and was so terrified with what he
saw, that, falling down on his bare knees, he put up a long petition to heaven,
to deliver him from the hands of that ruffian, and promised never to defraud a
customer for the future of the value of a halfpenny, provided he might be
rescued from his present distress -- Whether or not this disburthening his
conscience afforded him any ease, I know not; but he slipped into bed again and
lay very quiet until the robber and his mistress were asleep, which he
understood by their snoring in concert; then, rising softly, he untied a rope
that was round his pack, and making it fast to one end of it, opened the window
with as little noise as possible, and lowered his goods into the yard with
great dexterity; which having done, he moved gently to our bedside, and bid us
farewell, telling us, that as we run no risk, we might take our rest with great
confidence, and in the morning assure the landlord that we knew nothing of his
escape: then shaking us by the hands, and wishing us all manner of success, he
let himself drop from the window without any danger to the ground, which was
not above one yard from his feet as he hung on the outside. Although I did not
think proper to accompany him in his flight, I was not at all free from
apprehension, when I reflected on what might be the effects of the highwayman's
disappointment, who certainly intended to make free with the pedlar's ware.
Neither was my companion at more ease in his mind, but on the contrary so
possessed with the dreadful idea of Rifle, that he solicited me strongly to
follow our countryman's example, and so elude the fatal resentment of that
terrible adventurer, who would certainly wreak his vengeance on us, as
accomplices of the pedlar's elopement. -- But I represented to him, the danger
of giving Rifle cause to think we knew his profession, by putting him in mind,
that if ever he should meet us again on the road (which far from being
impossible) he would look upon us as dangerous acquaintance, and find it his
interest to put us out of the way. -- I told him withal, the confidence I had
in Betty's goodnature; in which he acquiesced, and during the remaining part
of the night, we concerted a proper method of behavior, to render us
unsuspected in the morning.

It was no sooner day, than Betty, entering our chamber, and perceiving the
window open, cried out, "Ods bobs! Sure you Scotchmen must have hot
constitutions, to lie all night with the window open in such cold weather!" --
I feigned to start out of sleep, and withdrawing the curtain, called, "What Is
the matter?" When she showed me, I affected surprise, and said, "Bless me! the
window was shut when we went to bed." -- "I Will be hanged, said she, if Sawny
Waddle the pedlar has not got up in a dream and done it, for I heard him very
obstropulous in his sleep. -- Sure I put a chamber pot under his bed." -- With
these words she advanced to the bed in which he lay, and finding the sheets
cold, she exclaimed, "Good lack a daisy! the rogue is fled!" -- "Fled (cried I,
with a feigned amazement) G -- d forbid! -- Sure he has not robbed us." -- Then
springing up, I laid hold of my breeches, and emptied all my loose money into
my hand; which having reckoned, I said, Heaven be praised our money is all
safe. -- Strap, look to the knapsack. -- He did so, and found all was right. --
Upon which, we asked with seeming concern, if he had stole nothing belonging to
the house. -- "No, no, replied she, he has stole nothing but his reckoning;"
which, it seems, this pious pedlar had forgot to discharge in the midst of his
devotion. -- Betty, after a moment's pause withdrew, and immediately we could
hear her waken Rifle, who no sooner heard of Waddle's flight, than he jumped
out of bed and dressed, venting a thousand execrations, and vowing to murder
the pedlar if ever he could set eyes on him again; "For, said he, the scoundrel
has by this time raised the hue and cry against me." -- Having dressed himself
in a hurry, he mounted his horse, and for that time rid us of his company and a
thousand fears that were the consequence of it. -- While we were at breakfast,
Betty endeavored by all the cunning she was mistress of, to learn whether or
no we suspected our fellow-lodger, whom we saw take horse; but as we were on
our guard, we answered her sly questions with a simplicity she could not
distrust; when all of a sudden, we heard the trampling of a horse's feet at the
door. This noise alarmed Strap so much, whose imagination was wholly engrossed
by the image of Rifle, that with a countenance as pale as milk, he cried out,
"O Lord! there is the highwayman returned!" -- Our landlady startled at these
words, said, "What highwayman, young man? -- Do you think any highwaymen
harbor here?" -- Though I was very much disconcerted at this piece of
indiscretion in Strap, I had presence of mind enough to tell her, we had met a
horseman the day before, whom Strap had foolishly supposed to be a highwayman,
because he rode with pistols; and that he was terrified at the sound of a
horse's feet ever since. -- She forced a smile at the ignorance and
timorousness of my comrade; but I could perceive, (not without great concern)
that this account was not at all satisfactory to her.

CHAP. IX.
We proceed on our journey -- are overtaken by an highwayman who fires at
Strap, is prevented from shooting me by a company of horsemen, who ride in
pursuit of him -- Strap is put to bed at an inn. -- Adventures at that inn.

AFTER having paid our score, and taken leave of our hostess, who embraced me
tenderly at parting, we proceeded on our journey, blessing our selves that we
had come off so well. We had not walked above five miles, when we observed a
man on horseback galloping after us, whom we in a short time recognized to be
no other than this formidable hero who had already given us so much vexation.
-- He stopped hard by me, and asked if I knew who he was? -- My astonishment
had disconcerted me so much, that I did not hear his question, which he
repeated with a volley of oaths and threats; but I remained as mute as before.
-- Strap seeing my discomposure, fell upon his knees in the mud, uttering with
a lamentable voice, these words: "For Ch -- st's sake, have mercy upon us, Mr.
Rifle, we know you very well." -- "O ho! cried the thief, you do! -- but by G
-- d, you never shall be evidence against me in this world, you dog!" -- So
saying, he drew a pistol, and fired it at the unfortunate shaver, who fell flat
upon the ground without speaking one word. -- My comrade's fate, and my own
situation, rivetted me to the place where I stood, deprived of all sense and
reflection; so that I did not make the least attempt either to run away, or
deprecate the wrath of this barbarian, who snapped a second pistol at me; but
before he had time to prime again, perceived a company of horsemen coming up;
whereupon he rode off, and left me standing motionless as a statue, in which
posture I was sound by those whose appearance had saved my life. -- This
company, which consisted of three men in livery, well armed, was headed by an
officer, who (as I afterward learned) was the person from whom Rifle had taken
the pocket pistols the day before; and who, making known his misfortune to a
nobleman he met on the road, assuring him, his non-resistance was altogether
owing to his consideration for the ladies in the coach, procured the assistance
of his Lordship's servants to go in quest of the plunderer. -- This holiday
captain scampered up to me with great address, and asked who fired the pistol
which he had heard. -- As I had not yet recovered my reason, he, before I could
answer, observed a body lying on the ground: at which sight, his color
vanished, and he pronounced with a faultering tongue, "Gentlemen, here is murder
committed I Let us alight." -- "No, no, said one of his followers, let us
rather pursue the murderer. -- Which way went he, young man?" -- By this time,
I had recollected myself so far as to tell them he could not be a quarter of a
mile before them; and beg one of them to assist me in conveying the corpse of my
friend to the next house, in order to its being interred. -- The captain
foreseeing that in case he pursued, he must soon come to action, began to curb
his horse, and give him the spur at the same time, which made the creature rear
up and snort in such a manner, that he called out, his horse was frightened and
would not proceed; at the same time wheeling him round and round, stroaking his
neck, whistling and wheedling him with "Sirrah, sirrah -- gently, gently, etc."
-- "Z -- ds! (cries one of the servants) sure my Lord's Sorrel is not resty!"
-- With these words, he bestowed a lash on his buttocks, and Sorrel disdaining
the rein, sprung forward with the captain at a pace that would have soon
brought him up with the robber, had not the girth (happily for him) given way,
by which means he landed in the dirt; and two of his attendants continued their
pursuit, without minding his situation in the least. -- Mean while one of the
three who remained at my desire, turning the Body of Strap to one side, in
order to see the wound which had killed him, found him still warm and
breathing; whereupon I immediately let him blood, and saw him, with
inexpressible joy, recover; having received no other wound than what his sear
inflicted. -- Having got him upon his legs, we walked together to an inn, about
half a mile from the place, where Strap being not quite recovered, went to bed;
and in a little time after, the third servant returned with the captain's horse
and furniture, leaving himself to crawl after as well as he could. This
Gentleman of the sword upon his arrival, complained grievously of the bruise
occasioned by his fall; and on the recommendation of the servant, who warranted
my ability, I was employed to bleed him, for which he rewarded me with half a
crown.

The time between this and dinner, I passed in observing a game at cards,
between two farmers, an exciseman, and a young fellow in a rusty gown and
cassock, who, as I afterward understood, was curate of a neighboring parish.
-- It was easy to perceive that the match was not equal; the two farmers being
partners, having to do with a couple of sharpers, who stripped them of all their
cash in a very short time. -- But what surprised me very much, was to hear this
clergyman reply to one of the countrymen who seemed to suspect foul play, in
these words: "D -- n me, friend, do you question my honor?" -- I did not at all
wonder to find a cheat in canonicals, this being an animal frequent in my own
country; but I was scandalized at the indecency of his behavior, which
appeared in the oaths he swore, and the baudy songs which he sung. -- At last,
to make amends, in some sort, for the damage he had done the unwary boo^s, he
pulled out a fiddle from the lining of his gown, and promising to treat them
with a dinner, began to play most melodiously, singing all the while in
concert. -- This good humor of the parson inspired the company with so much
glee, that the farmers soon forgot their losses, and all hands went to dancing
in the yard. While we were agreeably amused in this manner, our musician spying
a horseman riding toward the inn, stopped all of a sudden, crying out, "Gad so!
gentlemen, I beg your pardon, there is our dog of a doctor coming into the inn."
-- And immediately concealed his instrument, and ran toward the gate, where he
took hold of the vicar's bridle, and helped him off, enquiring very cordially
into the state of his health. -- This rosy son of the church (who might be
about the age of fifty) having alighted, and entrusted the curate with his
horse, stalked with great solemnity into the kitchen, where, sitting down by
the fire, he called for a bottle of ale and a pipe; scarce deigning an answer
to the submissive questions of some present who knew him, about the welfare of
his family. -- While he indulged himself in this state, amidst a profound
silence, the curate approaching him with great reverence, asked if he would not
be pleased to honor us with his company at dinner? To which he answered in the
negative, saying, he had been to visit 'squire Bumpkin, who had drank himself
into a high fever at the last assizes; and that he had, on leaving his own
house, told Betty he should dine at home. -- Accordingly, when he had made an
end of his bottle and pipe, he got up and moved toward the door with the fame
dignity as when he entered; where his journeyman stood ready with his nag. --
He had no sooner mounted, than this facetious person, coming into the kitchen,
began in this manner: "There the old rascal goes, and the D -- l go with him.
-- You see how the world wags, gentlemen. -- By G -- d, this rogue of a vicar
does not deserve to live; -- and yet he has two livings worth 400 l. per annum,
while poor I am fain to do all his drudgery, and ride twenty miles every Sunday
to preach, for what? why truly, for 20 l. a year. -- I scorn to boast of my own
qualifications, but -- comparisons, you know, are odious. -- I should be glad
to know how this swag-bellied doctor deserves to be more at ease than me. -- He
can loll in his elbow chair at home, indulge himself in the best of victuals
and wine, and enjoy the conversation of Betty his housekeeper. -- You
understand me, gentlemen. -- Betty is the doctor's poor kinswoman, and a pretty
girl she is; -- but no matter for that; -- ay, and a dutiful girl to her
parents, whom she goes to see regularly every year, though I must own I could
never learn in what county they live. -- My service to ye gentlemen." -- By this
time dinner being ready, I waked my companion, and we eat all together with
great cheerfulness and satisfaction. When our meal was ended, and every man's
share of the reckoning adjusted, the curate went out on pretense of some
necessary occasion, and mounting his horse, left the two farmers to satisfy the
host in the best manner they could. -- We were no sooner informed of this piece
of finesse, then the exciseman who had been silent hitherto, began with a
malicious grin, "Ay, ay, this is an old trick of Shufle, -- I could not help
smiling, when he talked of treating. -- You must know, this is a very curious
fellow. -- He picked up some scraps of learning while he served young lord
Trifle at the university. -- But what he most excells in, is pimping. -- No man
knows his talents better than I, for I was valet de chamber to 'squire Tattle,
an intimate companion of Shuffle's lord. -- He got himself into a scrape, by
pawning some of his lordship's clothes, on which account he was turned away;
but as he was acquainted with some particular circumstances of my lord's
conduct, he did not care to exasperate him too much, and so made interest for
his receiving orders, and afterward recommended him to the curacy which he now
enjoys. -- However, the fellow cannot be too much admired for his dexterity in
making a comfortable livelihood, in spite of such a small allowance. -- You
hear he plays a good stick, and is really diverting company -- this makes him
agreeable wherever he goes; -- and as for playing at cards, there is not a man
within three counties a match for him; -- the truth is, he is a damnable cheat,
and can shift a card with such address, that it is impossible to discover him."
-- At this he was interrupted by one of the farmers, who asked him, why he had
not justice enough to acquaint them with these particulars before they engaged
in play? -- The exciseman replied without any hesitation, that it was none of
his business to intermeddle between man and man; besides, he did not know they
were ignorant of Shuffle's character, which was notorious to the whole country.
-- This did not satisfy the other, who taxed him with abetting and assisting
the curate's knavery, and insisted on having his share of the winning returned;
which the exciseman as positively refused, affirming, that whatever slights
Shuffle might practice on other occasions, he was very certain, that he had
played on the square with them, and would answer it before any bench in
christendom; so saying, he got up, and having paid his reckoning, sneaked off.
The landlord thrusting his neck into the passage, to see if he was gone, shook
his head, saying, "Ah! Lord help us! if every sinner was to have his deserts.
-- Well, we victuallers must not disoblige the excisemen. -- But, I know what,
-- if parson Shuffle and he were weighed together, a straw thrown into either
scale would make the balance kick the beam. -- But, masters, this is under the
rose, continued Boniface with a whisper."

CHAP. X.
The highwayman is taken -- we are detained as evidences against him -- proceed
to the next village -- he escapes -- we arrive at another inn, where we go to
bed -- in the night we are awaked by a dreadful adventure -- next night we
lodge at the house of a schoolmaster -- our treatment there.

STRAP and I were about to depart on our journey, when we perceived a crowd on
the road, coming toward us, shouting and hollowing all the way. As it
approached, we could discern a man on horseback in the middle, with his hands
tied behind him, whom we soon knew to be Rifle. -- This highwayman not being so
well mounted as the two servants who went in pursuit of him, was soon
overtaken, and after having discharged his pistols, made prisoner without any
further opposition. They were carrying him in triumph, amidst the acclamations
of the country people, to a justice of peace in a neighboring village, but
stopped at our inn to join their companion and take refreshment. When Rifle was
dismounted, and placed in the yard, within a circle of peasants armed with
pitch-forks, I was amazed to see what a pitiful dejected fellow he now
appeared, who had but a few hours ago, filled me with so much terror and
confusion. -- My companion was so much encouraged by this alteration in his
appearance, that going up to the thief, he presented his clenched fists to his
nose, and declared, that he would either cudgel or box with the prisoner for a
guinea, which he immediately produced; and began to strip -- but was dissuaded
from this adventure by me, who represented to him the folly of the undertaking,
as Rifle was now in the hands of justice, which would, no doubt, give us all
satisfaction enough. -- But what made me repent of our impertinent curiosity,
was our being detained by the captors, as evidence against him, when we were
just going to set forward. However, there was no remedy; we were obliged to
comply, and accordingly joined in the cavalcade, which luckily took the same
road that we proposed. -- About the twilight we arrived at the place of our
destination, but as the justice was gone to visit a gentleman in the country,
with whom he would probably stay all night, the robber was confined in an empty
garret three stories high, from which it seemed impossible for him to escape:
this, nevertheless, was the case; for next morning, when they went up stairs,
to bring him before the justice, the bird was flown, having got out at the
window upon the leads, from whence he continued his rout along the tops of the
adjoining houses, and got into another garret window, where he sculked, until
the family were asleep, at which time he ventured down stairs, and let himself
out by the street door, which was found open. This event was a great
disappointment to those that apprehended him, who were flushed with hopes of
the reward; but gave me great joy, as I was permitted now to continue my
journey without any further molestation. -- Resolving to make up for the small
progress we had hitherto made, we this day traveled with great vigor, and
before night got to a market town twenty miles from the place from whence we
set out in the morning, without meeting any adventure worth notice. -- Here
having taken up our lodging at an inn, I found myself so fatigued, that I began
to despair of performing our journey on foot, and desired Strap to enquire if
there was any wagon, return-horses, or other cheap carriage in this place, to
depart for London tomorrow or next day. -- He was informed, that the wagon
from Newcastle for London had halted here two nights ago, and that it would be
an easy matter to overtake it, if not the next day, at farthest the day after
the next. -- This piece of news gave us some satisfaction, and after making a
hearty supper on hashed mutton, we were shown to our room, which contained two
beds, the one allotted for us, and the other for a very honest gentleman, who,
we were told, was then drinking below. Though we could have very well dispensed
with his company, we were glad to submit to this disposition, as there was not
another bed empty in the house; and accordingly went to rest, after having
secured our baggage under the bolster. About two or three a-clock in the
morning, I was waked out of a very profound sleep, by a dreadful noise in the
chamber, which did not fail to throw me into an agony of consternation, when I
heard these words pronounced with a terrible voice. -- "Blood and wounds! run
the halbert into the guts of him that is next you, and I Will blow the other's
brains out presently." -- This dreadful salutation had no sooner reached the
ears of Strap, than starting out of bed, he run against some body in the dark,
and overturned him in an instant, at the same time bawling out, "Fire! murder!
fire! which in a moment alarmed the whole house, and filled our chamber with a
crowd of naked people. -- When lights were brought, the occasion of all this
disturbance soon appeared; which was no other than our fellow lodger, whom we
found lying on the floor scratching his head, with a look testifying the utmost
astonishment, at the concourse of apparitions that surrounded him. -- This
honest gentleman was, it seems, a recruiting sergeant, who having listed two
country fellows overnight, dreamed they had mutinied, and threatened to murder
him and the drummer who was along him. -- This made such an impression on his
imagination, that he got up in his sleep, and expressed himself as above. --
When our apprehension of danger vanished, the company beheld one another with
great surprise and mirth; but what attracted the notice of every one, was our
landlady with nothing on her but her shift and a large pair of buckskin
breeches with the backside before, which she had slipped on in the hurry, and her
husband with her petticoat about his shoulders: one had wrapped himself in a
blanket, another was covered with a sheet, and the drummer who had given his
only shirt to be washed, appeared in querpo with the bolster rolled about his
middle. -- When this affair was discussed, every body retired to his own
apartment, the sergeant slipped into bed, and my companion and I slept without
any further disturbance till the morning, when we got up, went to breakfast,
paid our reckoning, and set forward in expectation of overtaking the wagon; in
which, however, we were disappointed that day. As we exerted ourselves more
than usual, I found myself quite spent with fatigue, when we entered a small
village in the twilight. We enquired for a public house, and were directed to
one of a very sorry appearance. At our entrance the landlord, who seemed to be
a venerable old man, with long gray hair, rose from a table placed by a large
fire in a very neat paved kitchen, and with a cheerful countenance accosted us
in these words: " Salvete Pueri -- ingredimini." -- I was not a little pleased
to hear our host speak Latin, because I was in hopes of recommending myself to
him by my knowledge in that language; I therefore answered without hesitation,
-- Dissolve frigus, ligna super foco. -- large reponens. -- I had no sooner
pronounced these words, than the old gentleman running toward me, shook me by
the hand, crying, " -- Fili mi dilectissime! unde venis! -- a superis, ni
fallor?" -- in short, finding we were both read in the classicks, he did not
know how to testify his regard, but ordered his daughter, a jolly rosycheeked
damsel, who was his sole domestic, to bring us a bottle of his quadrimum. --
repeating from Horace at the same time, " Deprome quadrimum sabina, O
thaliarche, merum diota." This quadrimum was excellent ale of his own brewing,
of which he told us he had always an amphora four years old, for the use of
himself and friends. -- In the course of our conversation, which was
interlarded with scraps of Latin, we understood that this facetious person was
a schoolmaster, whose income being small, he was fain to keep a glass of good
liquor for the entertainment of passengers, by which he made shift to make the
two ends of the year meet. -- "I am this day, said he, the happiest old fellow
in his majesty's dominions. -- My wife, rest her soul, is in heaven. My
daughter is to be married next week; -- but the two chief pleasures of my life
are these (pointing to the bottle and a large edition of Horace that lay one
the table.) I am old, it is true, -- what then? the more reason I should enjoy
the small share of life that remains, as my friend Flaccus advises: -- Tu ne
quaesieris scire (nefas.) Quem, mihi quem tibi finem dii dederint -- Carpe diem
quam minimum credula postero." -- As he was very inquisitive about our affairs,
we made no scruple of acquainting him with our situation, which when he had
learned, he enriched us with advices how to behave in the world, telling us
that he was no stranger to the deceits of mankind. -- In the mean time he
ordered his daughter to lay a fowl to the fire for supper, for he was resolved
this night to regale his friends -- permittens divis caetera. -- While our
entertainment was preparing, our host recounted the adventures of his own life,
which, as they contain nothing remarkable, I forbear to rehearse. When we had
fared sumptuously and drank several bottles of his quadrimum, I expressed a
desire of going to rest, which was with some difficulty complied with, after he
had informed us that we should overtake the wagon by noon next day; and that
there was room enough in it for half a dozen, there being only four passengers
as yet in that convenience. -- Before my comrade and I fell asleep we had some
conversation about the good humor of our landlord, which gave Strap such an
idea of his benevolence, that he was positive we should pay nothing for our
lodging and entertainment. -- "Don't you observe, said he, that he has
conceived a particular affection for us, -- nay, even treated us at supper with
extraordinary fare, which, to be sure, we should not of ourselves, have called
for?" -- I was partly of Strap's opinion; but the experience I had of the world
made me suspend my belief till tomorrow morning, when, getting up betimes, we
breakfasted with our host and his daughter, on hasty-pudding and ale, and
desired to know what we had to pay. -- "Biddy will let you know, gentlemen,
said he, for I never mind these matters. -- Money-matters are beneath the
concern of one who lives on the Horatian plan. -- Crescentem sequitur cura
pecuniam." Mean while Biddy having consulted a slate that hung in a corner,
told us, our reckoning came to 8 s. 7 d. -- "Eight shillings and seven pence!
cried Strap, it is impossible -- you must be mistaken, young woman." -- "Reckon
again, child, (says her father, very deliberately) perhaps you have
miscounted." -- "No indeed, father, (she replied) I know my business better."
-- I could contain my indignation no longer, but said it was a very
unconscionable bill, and demanded to know the particulars; upon which the old
man got up, muttering "Ay, ay, let us see the particulars, -- that is but
reasonable." -- And taking pen, ink, and paper, wrote the following Items:

s. d. To bread and beer 0 6 To a fowl and sausages 2 6 To four bottles
quadrim. 2 0 To fire and tobacco 0 7 To lodging 2 0 To breakfast 1 0 8 7

As he had not the appearance of a common publican, and had raised a sort of
veneration in me by his demeanor the preceding night, it was not in my power to
unbraid him as he deserved; therefore I contented myself with saying, I was
sure he did not learn to be an extortioner from Horace. He answered, "I was a
but young man and did not know the world, or I would not tax him with
extortion, whose only aim was to live contentus parvo, and keep off importuna
pauperies." -- My fellow-traveller could not so easily put up with this
imposition; but swore he should either take one third of the money, or go
without. -- While we were engaged in this dispute, I perceived the daughter go
out, and conjecturing the occasion, immediately paid the exorbitant demand,
which was no sooner done, than Biddy returned with two stout fellows, who came
in on pretense of taking their morning draught; but in reality to frighten us
into compliance. -- Just as we departed, Strap, who was half distracted on
account of this piece of expense, went up to the schoolmaster, and grinning in
his face, pronounced with great emphasis; "Semper avarus eget." -- To which the
pedant replied, with a malicious smile; -- " Animum rege, qui, nisi paret,
imperat."

CHAP. XI.
We descry the wagon -- get into it -- arrive at an inn -- our fellow
travelers described -- a mistake is committed by Strap, which produces strange
things.

WE traveled half a mile without exchanging one word; my thoughts being
engrossed by the knavery of the world, to which I must be daily exposed; and
the contemplation of my finances, which began sensibly to diminish. -- At
length Strap, who could hold no longer, addressed me thus: -- "Well, fools and
their money are soon parted. -- If my advice had been taken, that old
skin-flint should have been damned before he had got more than the third of his
demand. -- It Is a sure sign you came easily by your money, when you squander it
away in this manner. -- Ah! God help you, how many brisly beards must I have
mowed before I earned 4 shillings and three pence halfpenny, which is all
thrown to the dogs? -- How many days have I sat weaving hair, till my toes were
numbed by the cold, my fingers cramped, and my nose as blue as the sign of the
periwig that hung over the door? -- What the devil was you afraid of? I would
have engaged to box with any one of those fellows who came in, for a guinea. --