companion would have fought any body, when his life was in no danger; but he
had a mortal aversion to fire arms and all instruments of death. In order to
appease him, I assured him, no part of this extraordinary expense should fall
upon his shoulders; at which he was affronted, and told me, he would have me to
know, that although he was a poor barber's boy, he had a soul to spend his
money with the best 'squire of the land. -- Having walked all day at a great
pace, without halting for a refreshment, we descried toward the evening, to
our inexpressible joy, the wagon about a quarter of a mile before us; and by
that time we came up with it, were both of us so weary, that I verily believe
it would have been impracticable for us to have walked one mile further. -- We
therefore bargained with the driver, whose name was Joey, to give us a cast to
the next stage for a shilling; at which place we would meet the master of the
wagon, with whom we might agree for the rest of the journey.

Accordingly the convenience stopped, and Joey having placed the ladder, Strap
(being loaded with our baggage) mounted first; but just as he was getting in, a
tremendous voice assailed his ears in these words: "God's fury! there shall no
passengers come here." -- The poor shaver was so disconcerted at this
exclamation, which both he and I imagined proceeded from the mouth of a giant,
that he descended with great velocity, and a countenance as white as paper. --
Joey perceiving our astonishment, called with an arch sneer, "Waunds, captain!
whay woan't yau sooffer the poor waggoneer to meake a penny? -- Coom, coom,
young man, get oop, get oop, -- never moind the coptain, -- I'se not afear'd of
the coptain." -- This was not encouragement sufficient to Strap, who could not
be prevailed upon to venture up again; upon which I attempted, though not
without a quaking heart, when I heard the same voice muttering like distant
thunder: "By G -- d I will not be used so, d -- n -- n seize me if I am!" --
However I crept in, and by accident got an empty place in the straw, which I
immediately took possession of, without being able to discern the faces of my
fellow-travellers in the dark. Strap following with the knapsack on his back,
chanced to take the other side, and by a jolt of the carriage, pitched directly
upon the stomach of the captain, who bellowed out in a most dreadful manner:
"Blood and thunder! where is my sword?" -- At these words, my frighted comrade
started up, and at one spring, bounced against me with such force, that I
thought the supposed son of Anak intended to smother me. -- In the mean time a
female voice cried out, "Bless me! what is the matter, my dear?" "The matter,
replied the captain, damn my blood! my guts are almost squeezed out by that
Scotchman's hump." Strap trembling all the while at my back, asked him pardon,
and laid the blame of what had happened upon the jolting of the wagon. -- The
woman who spoke before, went on: "Ay, ay, my dear, it is our own fault -- we
may thank ourselves for all the inconveniences we meet with. -- I thank God, I
never traveled so before, -- I Am sure if my lady or Sir John was to know where
we are, they would not sleep this night for vexation. -- I wish to God we had
writ for the chariot, -- I know we shall never be forgiven." "Come, come, my
dear (replied the captain) it don't signify fretting now, -- we shall laugh it
over as a frolic. -- I hope you will not suffer in your health. -- I shall
make my lord very merry with our adventures in the Diligence." -- This
discourse gave me such a high notion of the captain and his lady, that I durst
not venture to join in the conversation; but immediately after, another female
voice begins: "Some people give themselves a great many needless airs -- better
folks than any here have traveled in wagons before now. -- Some of us have
rode in coaches and chariots with three footmen behind them, without making so
much fuss about it. -- What then? we are now all upon a footing, therefore let
us be sociable and merry. -- What do you say, Isaac? Is'n't this a good motion,
you doting rogue? -- Speak, you old cent. per cent. fornicator. -- What
desperate debt are you thinking of? What mortgage are you planning? Well,
Isaac, positively you shall never gain my favor till you turn over a new leaf;
grow honest, and live like a gentleman. -- In the mean time, give me a kiss,
you old fumbler." -- These words, accompanied with a hearty smack, enlivened
the person to whom they were addressed, to such a degree, that he cried in
transport, though with a quavering voice, "Ah! you wanton baggage -- upon my
credit, you are a waggish girl, he, he, he." -- This laugh introduced a fit of
coughing, which almost suffocated the poor usurer (such, we afterward found,
was the profession of this our fellow-traveller.) -- About this time, I fell
asleep, and enjoyed a comfortable nap till such time as we arrived at the inn
where we put up. -- Here, having got out of the wagon first, I had an
opportunity of viewing the passengers in order as they entered. -- The first
who appeared was a brisk airy girl, about twenty years old, with a silver-laced
hat on her head, instead of a cap, a blue stuff riding suit trimmed with
silver, very much tarnished, and a whip in her hand. -- After her, came
limping, an old man with a worsted nightcap, buttoned under his chin, and a
broad brimmed hat slouched over it, an old rusty blue cloak tied about his
neck, under which appeared a brown surtout, that covered a threadbare coat and
waste-coat, and, as we afterward discerned, a dirty flannel jacket. -- His
eyes were hollow, bleared and gummy; his face was shrivelled into a thousand
wrinkles, his gums were destitute of teeth, his nose sharp and drooping, his
chin peeked and prominent, so that when he mumped or spoke, they approached one
another like a pair of nut-crackers; he supported himself on an ivory-headed
cane, and his whole figure was a just emblem of winter, famine and avarice. --
But how was I surprised, when I beheld the formidable captain leading in his
wife; in the shape of a little, thin creature, about the age of forty, with a
long, withered visage, very much resembling that of a baboon, through the upper
part of which, two little gray eyes peeped: He wore his own hair in a queue
that reached to his rump, which immoderate length, I suppose, was the occasion
of a baldness that appeared on the crown of his head, when he deigned to take
off his hat, which was very much of the size and cock of Pistol's. -- Having
laid aside his great coat, I could not help admiring the extraordinary make of
this man of war: He was about five foot and three inches high, sixteen inches
of which went to his face and long scraggy neck; his thighs were about six
inches in length, his legs resembling spindles or drum-sticks, two feet and an
half, and his body, which put me in mind of extension without substance,
engrossed the remainder; -- so that on the whole, he appeared like a spider or
grasshopper erect, -- and was almost a vox and preterca nihil. -- His dress
consisted in a frock of what is called bear-skin, the skirts of which were
about half a foot long, an Hussar waistcoat, scarlet breeches reaching half way
down his thigh, worsted stockings rolled up almost to his groin, and shoes with
wooden heels at least two inches high; he carried a sword very near as long as
himself in one hand, and in the other conducted his lady, who seemed to be a
woman of his own age, and still retained some remains of an agreeable person;
but so ridiculously affected, that had I then known as much of the world as I
do now, I might have easily perceived in her, the deplorable vanity and
second-hand airs of a lady's woman. -- We were all assembled in the kitchen,
when captain Weazel (for that was his name) desired a room with a fire for
himself and spouse; and told the landlord, they would sup by themselves. -- The
innkeeper replied, that he could not afford them a room by themselves; and as
for supping, he had prepared victuals for the passengers in the wagon without
respect of persons, but if he could prevail on the rest to let him have his
choice in a separate manner, with all his heart: This was no sooner said, than
all of us declared against the proposal, and miss Jenny (our other female
passenger) observed, that if captain Weazel and his lady had a mind to sup by
themselves, they might wait until we should have done. -- At this, the captain
put on a martial frown and looked very big, without speaking; while his
yoke fellow, with a disdainful toss of her nose, muttered something about
"Creature;" -- which miss Jenny over-hearing, stepped up to her, saying, "None of
your names, good Mrs. Abigail; -- creature quotha, -- I Will assure you, -- No
such creature as you neither -- no ten pound sneaker -- no quality coupler." --
Here the captain interposed with a "Damme, madam, what do you mean by that?" --
"Damn you, sir, who are you? (replied miss Jenny) who made you a captain, you
pitiful, trencher-scraping, pimping curler? -- 'Sdeath! the army is come to a
fine pass, when such fellows as you get commissions. -- What, I suppose you
think I don't know you? -- By G -- d, you and your helpmate are well met, -- a
cast-off mistress, and a bald valet de chamber are well yoked together. Blood
and wounds! (cried Weazel) do you question the honor of my wife, madam? -- Hell
and damnation! No man in England durst say so much, -- I would flea him,
carbonado him! Fury and destruction! I would have his liver for my supper." --
So saying, he drew his sword, and flourished with it, to the great terror of
Strap: while miss Jenny snapping her fingers, told him, she did not value his
resentment a f -- t. -- In the midst of this quarrel, the master of the wagon
alighted, who understanding the cause of it, and fearing the captain and his
lady would take so much umbrage, as to leave his carriage, was at great pains
to have every thing made up, which he at last accomplished, and we sat down to
supper all together. At bedtime we were shown to our apartments. The old
usurer, Strap and I, were conducted to one room; the captain, his wife, and
miss Jenny to another. -- About midnight, my companion's bowels being
disordered, he got up, in order to go backward; in his return, mistaking one
door for another, he entered Weazel's chamber, and without any hesitation went
to bed to his wife, who was fast asleep; the captain being at another end of
the room, groping for some empty vessel, his own chamber pot being leaky: As he
did not perceive Strap coming in, he went toward his own bed, after having
sound a convenience; but no sooner did he feel a rough head with a cotton
nightcap on it, than it came into his mind, that he was got to miss Jenny's
bed instead of his own, and that the head he felt, was that of some gallant,
with whom she had made an assignation. -- Full of this conjecture, and
scandalized at the prostitution of his apartment, he snatched up the vessel he
had just before filled, and emptied it at once on the astonished barber and his
own wife, who waking at that instant, broke forth into lamentable cries, which
not only alarmed the husband beyond measure, but frightened poor Strap almost
out of his senses; for he verily believed himself bewitched; especially when
the incensed captain seized him by the throat, with a volley of oaths, asking
him how he durst have the presumption to attempt the chastity of his wife. --
Poor Strap was so amazed and confounded, that he could say nothing, but, -- "I
take God to witness she is a virgin for me." -- Mrs. Weazel enraged to find
herself in such a pickle, through the precipitation of her husband, got up in
her shift, and with the heel of her shoe, which she found at the bedside,
belabored the captain's bald pate, till he cried "Murder." -- "I Will teach you
to empty your stink-pots on me, (cried she) you pitiful, hop of my thumb
coxcomb. -- What? I warrant you're jealous, you man of lath. -- Was it for this
I condescended to take you to my bed, you poor, withered, sapless twig?" -- The
noise occasioned by this adventure, had brought the master of the wagon and me
to the door, where we overheard all that passed, with great satisfaction. In
the mean time we were alarmed with the cry of "Rape! Murder! Rape!" which miss
Jenny pronounced with great vociferation. -- "O! you vile, abominable old
villain, (said she) would you rob me of my virtue? -- But I Will be revenged of
you, you old goat! I will! -- help! for heaven's sake! help! -- I shall be
ravished! ruined! help!" -- Some servants of the inn hearing this cry, came
running up stairs with lights, and such weapons as chance afforded; when we
beheld a very diverting scene. -- In one corner stood the poor captain
shivering in his shirt, which was all torn to rags; with a woeful visage,
scratched all over by his wise, who had by this time wrapped the covering about
her, and sat crying on the side of her bed -- In the other end, lay the old
usurer sprawling on miss Jenny's bed, with nothing on him but his flannel
jacket over his shirt, and his tawny meagre limbs exposed to the air; while she
held him fast by the two ears, and loaded him with execrations. -- When we
asked what was the matter, she affected to weep, and told us, she was afraid
that wicked rogue had ruined her in her sleep, and bid us take notice of what
we saw, for she intended to make use of our evidence against him. -- The poor
wretch looked like one more dead than alive, and begged for Christ's sake to be
released; which was no sooner done, than he protested she was no woman, but a
devil incarnate -- that she had first seduced his flesh to rebel, and then
betrayed him. -- "Yes, cockatrice (continued he, with a faultering voice) thou
know thou did spread this snare for me -- but thou shall not succeed --
for I will hang myself before thou shall get a farthing of me." -- So saying,
he crawled to his own bed, groaning all the way. -- We then advanced to the
captain, who told us, "Gentlemen, here has been a damned mistake; but I Will be
revenged on him who was the occasion of it. -- That Scotchman who carries the
knapsack shall not breathe this vital air another day, if my name be Weazel. --
My dear, I ask you ten thousand pardons; you are sensible I could mean no harm
to you." -- "I know not what you meant (replied she, sobbing) but I know I have
got enough to send me to my grave." -- At length they were reconciled. -- The
wife was complimented with a share of miss Jenny's bed (her own being
overflowed) and the master of the wagon invited Weazel to sleep the remaining
part of the night with him. I retired to mine, where I found Strap mortally
afraid, he having got away in the dark, while the captain and his lady were at
logger-heads.

CHAP. XII.
Captain Weazel challenges Strap, who declines the combat -- an affair between
the captain and me -- the usurer is fain to give miss Jenny five guineas for a
release -- we are in danger of losing a meal -- the behavior of Weazel, Jenny,
and Joey on that occasion -- an account of captain Weazel and his lady -- the
captain's courage tried -- Isaac's mirth at the captain's expense.

NEXT morning, I agreed to give the master of the wagon ten shillings for my
passage to London, provided Strap should be allowed to take my place when I
should be disposed to walk. -- At the same time I desired him to appease the
incensed captain, who by this time had got into the kitchen, with a drawn sword
in his hand, and threatened with many oaths, to sacrifice the villain, who
attempted to violate his bed; but it was to no purpose for the master to
explain the mistake, and assure him of the poor lad's innocence, who stood
trembling behind me all the while: the more submission that appeared in Strap,
the more implacable seemed the resentment of Weazel, who swore he must either
fight him, or he would instantly put him to death. -- I was extremely provoked
at this insolence, and told him, it could not be supposed that a poor barber
lad would engage a man of the sword at his own weapon; but I was persuaded he
would wrestle or box with him. -- To which proposal Strap immediately gave
assent, by saying, he would box with him for a guinea. -- Weazel replied with a
look of disdain, it was beneath any gentleman of his character to fight like a
porter, or even to put himself on a footing, in any respect, with such a fellow
as Strap. -- "Ods bodikins! (cries Joey) sure coptain, yaw wauld not coommit
moorder! Here Is a poor lad that is willing to make attoonement for his offense;
and an that woant't satisfy yaw, offers to fight yaw fairly. -- An yaw woan't
box, I dare say, he will coodgel with yaw. -- Woan't yaw, my lad?" -- Strap,
after some hesitation, answered, "Ye -- yes, I Will cudgel with him." -- But this
expedient being also rejected by the captain, I began to smell his character,
and tipping Strap the wink, told the company, that I had always heard it said,
the person who receives a challenge should have the choice of the weapons; this
therefore being the rule in point of honor, I would venture to promise on the
head of my companion, that he would even fight captain Weazel at sharps; but it
should be with such sharps as Strap was best acquainted with, namely razors --
At my mentioning razors, I could perceive the captain's color to change, while
Strap pulling me by the sleeve, whispered with great eagerness; -- "No, no, no;
for the love of God, don't make any such bargain." -- At length, Weazel
recovered himself, turned toward me, and with a ferocious countenance, asked,
"Who the devil are you? -- will you fight me?" With these words, putting
himself in a posture, I was grievously alarmed at seeing the point of a sword
within half a foot of my breast; and springing to one side, snatched up a spit
that stood in the chimney corner, with which I kept my formidable adversary at
bay, who made a great many half longes, skipping backward every time, till at
last I got him pinned up in a corner, to the no small diversion of the company.
While he was in this situation, his wife entered, and seeing her husband in
these dangerous circumstances, uttered a dreadful scream, and swooned: Upon
this, Weazel demanded a cessation, which was immediately granted; and after his
lady had recovered, was contented with the submission of Strap, who falling on
his knees before him, protested the innocence of his intention, and asked
pardon for the mistake he had committed. This affair being ended without
bloodshed, we went to breakfast, but missed two of our company, to wit, miss
Jenny and the usurer. As for the first, Mrs. Weazel informed us, that she had
kept her awake all night with her groans; and that when she got up this
morning, miss Jenny was so much indisposed, that she could not proceed on her
journey. -- At this moment, a message came from her to the master of the
wagon, who immediately went into her chamber, followed by us all. -- She told
him in a lamentable tone, that she was afraid of a miscarriage owing to the
fright she received last night, from the brutality of Isaac; and as the event
was uncertain, desired the usurer might be detained to answer for the
consequence -- Accordingly this ancient Tarquin was found in the wagon,
whither he had retired to avoid the shame of last night's disgrace; and brought
by force into her presence. -- He no sooner appeared, than she began to weep
and sigh most piteously, and told us, if she died, she would leave her blood
upon the head of that ravisher. -- Poor Isaac, turning up his eyes and hands to
heaven, prayed that God would deliver him from the machinations of that
Jezabel; and assured us with tears in his eyes, that his being found in bed
with her, was the result of her own invitation. -- The waggoner understanding
the case, advised Isaac to make it up, by giving her a sum of money, to which
he replied with great vehemence, "A sum of money! -- a halter for the
cockatrice!" -- "O! it is very well, (said miss Jenny) I see it is in vain to
attempt that flinty heart of his, by fair means. -- Joey, be so good as to go
to the Justice, and tell him there is a sick person here, who wants to see him
on an affair of consequence." -- At the name of justice, Isaac trembling like
an aspen-leaf, and bidding Joey stay, asked with a faultering voice, "what she
would have?" She told him, that as he had not perpetrated his wicked purpose,
she would be satisfied with a small matter. -- And though the damage she might
sustain in her health, might be irreparable, she would give him a release for
an hundred guineas. -- "An hundred guineas! (cried he in an ecstasy) an hundred
furies! -- Where should a poor old wretch like me, have an hundred guineas? if
I had so much money, do you think I would be found traveling in a wagon, at
this season of the year?" -- "Come, come, (replied Jenny) None of your miserly
artifice here. -- You think I don't know Isaac Rapine the money-broker in the
Minories. -- Ah! you old rogue! many a pawn have you had from me and my
acquaintance which was never redeemed." -- Isaac finding it was in vain to
disguise himself, offered twenty shillings for a discharge, which she
absolutely refused under fifty pounds: At last, however, she was brought down
to five, which he paid with great reluctance, rather than be prosecuted for a
rape. -- After which this sick person made shift to get into the wagon, and we
set forwards in great tranquillity, Strap being accommodated with Joey's horse,
the driver himself choosing to walk. -- This morning and forenoon we were
entertained with an account of the valor of captain Weazel, who told us of his
having once knocked down a soldier that made game of him; of tweaking a drawer
by the nose, who found fault with his picking his teeth with a fork; and of his
sending a challenge to a cheese-monger, who had the presumption to be his
rival, -- for the truth of which he appealed to his wife. -- She confirmed
whatever he said, and observed such a thing happened that day, "I received a
loveletter from 'squire Gobble; -- and don't you remember, my dear, I was
prodigiously sick that very night with eating ortolans, when my lord Diddle
took notice of my complexion's being altered, and my lady was so alarmed, that
she had well nigh fainted." -- "Yes, my dear, (replied the captain) you know,
my lord said to me, with a sneer," -- "Billy, Mrs. Weazel is certainly
breeding." -- "And I answered cavalierly, My lord, I wish I could return the
compliment. -- Upon which the whole company broke out into an immoderate fit of
laughter; and my lord, who loves a repartee dearly, came round and bussed me."
-- We traveled in this manner five days, without interruption or meeting any
thing worth notice: Miss Jenny (who soon recovered her spirits) entertaining us
every day with diverting songs, of which she could sing a great number; and
rallying her old gallant, who notwithstanding could never be reconciled to her.
-- On the sixth day, while we were about to sit down to dinner, the innkeeper
came and told us, that three gentlemen just arrived, had ordered the victuals
to be carried to their apartment, although he had informed them that they were
bespoke by the passengers in the wagon. To which they had replied, "The
passengers in the wagon might be damned -- their betters must be served before
them, -- they supposed it would be no hardship on such travelers to dine upon
bread and cheese for one day." -- This was a terrible disappointment to us all;
and we laid our heads together how to remedy it; when miss Jenny propose that
captain Weazel, being by profession a soldier, ought in this case to protect
and prevent us from being insulted. -- But the captain excused himself, saying,
he would not for the world be known to have traveled in a wagon; swearing at
the same time, the (...) he appear with honor, they should eat his sword
sooner than his provision. -- Upon this declaration, miss Jenny snatching his
sword drew it, and run immediately to the kitchen, where she threatened to put
the cook to death, if he did not send the victuals into our chamber
immediately. -- The noise she made, brought the three strangers down, one of
whom no sooner perceived her, than he cried out, "Ha! Jenny Ramper! what the
devil brought thee hither?" -- "My dear Jack Rattle! (replied she, running into
his arms) is it you? -- Then Weazel may go to hell for a dinner -- I shall dine
with you." -- They consented to this, with a great deal of joy; and we were on
the point of being reduced to a very uncomfortable meal, when Joey
understanding the whole affair, entered the kitchen with a pitchfork in his
hand, swore he would be the death of any man who should pretend to seize the
victuals prepared for the wagon. -- This menace had like to have produced
fatal consequences; the three strangers drawing their swords, and being joined
by their servants, and we ranging ourselves on the side of Joey; when the
landlord interposing, offered to part with his own dinner to keep the peace,
which was accepted by the strangers; and we sat down at table without any
further molestation. -- In the afternoon, I chose to walk along with Joey, and
Strap took my place. -- Having entered into conversation with this driver, I
soon found him to be a merry, facetious, good-natured fellow, and withal very
arch: He informed me, that miss Jenny was a common girl upon the town, who
falling into company with a recruiting officer, he carried her down in the
stage-coach from London to Newcastle, where he had been arrested for debt, and
was now in prison; upon which she was fain to return to her former way of life,
in the manner we found her. -- He told me likewise, that one of the gentlemen's
servants, whom we left at the inn, having accidentally seen Weazel, immediately
knew him, and acquainted Joey with some particulars of his character, as
follows: That he had served my lord Frizzle in quality of valet de chamber many
years; while he lived separate from his lady: But upon their reconciliation,
she expressly insisted upon Weazel's being turned off, as well as the woman he
kept: whereupon his lordship, to get rid of them both with a good grace,
proposed that he should marry his mistress, and he would procure a commission
for him in the army; this expedient was agreed to, and Weazel is now, by his
lordship's interest, ensign in -- 's regiment, I found he and I had the same
sentiments with regard to Weazel's courage, which we resolved to put to the
trial, by alarming the passengers with the cry of, "an highwayman!" as soon as
we should discover an horseman appear. This we put in practice toward the
dusk, when we descried a man on horseback approaching us. Joey had no sooner
intimated to the people in the wagon, that he was afraid we should be all
robbed, than a general consternation arose: Strap jumped out of the wagon and
hid himself behind a hedge. The usurer put forth ejaculations, and made a
rustling among the straw, which made us conjecture he had hid something under
it. Mrs. Weazel wringing her hands, uttered lamentable cries; and the captain,
to our great amazement, began to snore; but this artifice did not succeed; for
miss Jenny, shaking him by the shoulder, bawled out, "'Sdeath! captain, is this
a time to snore, when we are going to be robbed? -- Get up for shame, and
behave like a soldier and a man of honor." -- Weazel pretended to be in a
great passion for being disturbed, and swore he would have his nap out if all
the highwaymen in England surrounded him. -- "D -- n my blood! what are you
afraid of (continued he;") at the same time trembling with such agitation, that
the whole carriage shook. -- This singular piece of behavior incensed miss
Ramper so much, that she cried out, "D -- n your pitiful soul, you are as
arrant a poltroon as ever was drummed out of a regiment. -- Stop the wagon,
Joey -- let me get out, and by G -- d, if I have rhetoric enough, the thief
shall not only take your purse, but your skin also." -- So saying, she leapt
out with great agility. -- By this time the horseman came up with us, and
happened to be a gentleman's servant well known to Joey, who communicated our
scheme, and desired him to carry it on a little further, by going up to the
wagon, and questioning those within it. -- The stranger consenting for the
sake of diversion, approached it, and in a terrible tone, demanded, "Who have
you got here?" -- Isaac replied with a lamentable voice, "Here is a poor
miserable sinner, who has got a small family to maintain, and nothing in the
world wherewithal, but these fifteen shillings, which if you rob me of, we must
all starve together." -- "Who Is that sobbing in the other corner?" (said the
supposed highwayman.) "A poor unfortunate woman, (answered Mrs. Weazel) upon
whom I beg you for Christ's sake, to have compassion." -- "Are you maid or
wife?" (said he) -- "Wife to my sorrow," (cried she.) -- "Who, or where is your
husband?" (continued he.) -- "My husband, (replied Mrs. Weazel) is an officer
in the army, and was left sick at the last inn where we dined." -- "You must be
mistaken, madam, (said he) for I myself saw him get into the wagon this
afternoon; -- But pray what smell is that? Sure your lapdog has befoul'd
himself; -- let me catch hold of the nasty cur, I Will teach him better manners."
-- Here he laid hold of one of Weazel's legs, and pulled him from under his
wife's petticoats where he had concealed himself. -- The poor trembling captain
being detected in this inglorious situation, rubbed his eyes, and affecting to
wake out of sleep, cried, "What Is the matter? -- What Is the matter?" -- "The
matter is not much, (answered the horseman) I only called in, to enquire after
your health, and so adieu, most noble captain." -- Having said this, he clapped
spurs to his horse, and was out of sight in a moment. -- It was some time
before Weazel could recollect himself, but at length, re-assuming the big look,
he said, "Damn the fellow! why did he ride away, before I had time to ask how
his lord and lady do? -- Don't you remember Tom, my dear?"x addressing himself
to his wife. -- "Yes, (replied she) I think I do remember something of the
fellow, -- but you know I seldom converse with people of his station." -- "Hoy
day! (cried Joey) do yaw know the young mon, coptain?" -- "Know him, (said
Weazel) many a time has he filled a glass of Burgundy for me, at my lord
Trippit's table." -- "And what may his neame be, coptain," (said Joey.) "His
name! -- his name (replied Weazel) is Tom Rinser. -- "Waunds! (cried Joey) a
has changed his true neame then! for I'se lay any wager he was christened John
Trotter." -- This observation raised the laugh against the captain, who seemed
very much disconcerted; when Isaac broke silence, and said, "It was no matter
who or what he was, since he had not proved the robber we suspected. -- And
that we ought to bless God for our narrow escape." -- "Bless God, (said Weazel)
bless the devil! for what? had he been a highwayman, I should have eat his
blood, body and guts, before he had robbed me, or any one in this Diligence."
-- "Ha, ha, ha! (cried miss Jenny) I believe you will eat all you kill indeed,
captain." -- The usurer was so pleased at the event of this adventure, that he
could not refrain from being severe, and took notice that captain Weazel seemed
to be a good Christian, for he had armed himself with patience and resignation,
instead of carnal weapons; and worked out his salvation with fear and
trembling. -- This piece of satire occasioned a great deal of mirth at Weazel's
expense, who muttered a great many oaths, and threatened to cut Isaac's throat;
-- which the usurer taking hold of, said, "Gentlemen and ladies, I take you all
to witness, that my life is in danger from this bloody-minded officer. -- I Will
have him bound over to the peace." This second sneer, procured another laugh
against him, and he remained crest-fallen during the remaining part of our
journey.

CHAP. XIII.
Strap and I are terrified by an apparition -- Strap's conjecture -- the
mystery explained by Joey -- we arrive at London -- our dress and appearance
described -- we are insulted in the street -- an adventure in the alehouse --
we are imposed upon by a waggish footman -- set to rights by a tobacconist --
take lodgings -- dive for a dinner -- an accident at our ordinary.

WE arrived at our inn, supped and went to bed; but Strap's distemper
continuing, he was obliged to get up in the middle of the night, and taking the
candle in his hand, which he had left burning for the purpose, he went down to
the house of office; whence in a short time he returned in a great hurry, with
his hair standing on end, and a look betokening horror and astonishment.
Without speaking a word, he set down the light, and jumped into bed behind me,
where he lay and trembled with great violence. -- When I asked him what was the
matter? he replied, with a broken accent, "God have mercy on us! I have seen
the devil." -- Though my prejudice was not quite so strong as his, I was not a
little alarmed at this exclamation, and much more so, when I heard the sound of
bells approaching our chamber, and felt my bedfellow cling close to me,
uttering these words, Christ have mercy upon us! there he comes. -- At that
instant, a monstrous overgrown raven entered our chamber, with bells at its
feet, and made directly toward our bed. -- As this creature is reckoned in our
country, a common vehicle for the devil and witches to play their pranks in, I
verily believed we were haunted; and in a violent fright, shrunk my head under
the bed-cloaths. -- This terrible apparition leapt upon the bed, and after
giving us several severe dabbs with its beak through the blankets, hopped away,
and vanished. Strap and I recommended ourselves to the protection of heaven
with great devotion, and when we no longer heard the noise, ventured to peep up
and take breath. -- But we had not been long freed from this phantom, when
another appeared, that had well nigh deprived us both of our senses. We
perceived an old man enter the room, with a long white beard that reached to
his middle; there was a certain wild peculiarity in his eyes and countenance,
that did not savor of this world: and his dress consisted of a brown stuff
coat, buttoned behind, and at the wrists, and an odd-fashioned cap of the same
stuff upon his head. -- I was so amazed that I had not power to move my eyes
from such a ghastly object, but lay motionless, and saw him come straight up to
me: when he got to the bed, he wrung his hands, and cried with a voice that did
not seem to belong to a human creature, "Where is Ralph?" I made no reply; upon
which, he repeated in an accent still more preternatural; "Where is Ralpho?" --
He had no sooner pronounced these words, than I heard the sound of the bells at
a distance; which the apparition having listened to, tript away, and left me
almost petrified with fear. It was a good while before I could recover myself
so far as to speak: and when at length I turned about to Strap, I found him in
a fit, which, however, did not last long. -- When he came to himself, I asked
his opinion of what had happened; and he assured me, that the first must
certainly be the soul of some person damned, which appeared by the chains about
its legs (for his fears had magnified the creature to the bigness of a horse,
and the sound of small morris bells to the clanking of massy chains) -- As for
the old man, he took it to be the spirit of somebody murdered long ago in this
place, which had power granted it to torment the assassin in the shape of a
raven, and that Rapho was the name of the said murderer. -- Although I had not
much faith in his interpretation, I was too much troubled to enjoy any sleep;
and in all my future adventures, never passed a night so ill. -- In the
morning, Strap imparted the whole affair to Joey, who after an immoderate fit
of laughter, explained the matter, by telling him that the old man was the
landlord's father, who had turned idiot some years ago, and diverted himself
with a tame raven, which, it seems, had hopped away from his apartment in the
night, and induced him to follow it to our chamber, where he had inquired after
it, under the name of Ralpho.

Nothing remarkable happened during the remaining part of our journey, which
continued six or seven days longer: At length we entered the great city, and
lodged all night at the inn, where the wagon halted. -- Next morning, all the
passengers parted different ways; while my companion and I sallied out to
enquire for the member of parliament to whom I had a letter of recommendation
from Mr. Crab. As we had discharged our lodging at the inn, Strap took up our
baggage, and marched behind me in the street with the knapsack on his back, as
usual, so that we made a very whimsical appearance. -- I had dressed myself to
the greatest advantage; that is, put on a clean ruffled shirt, my best thread
stockings, my hair (which was of the deepest red) hung down upon my shoulders,
as lank and straight as a pound of candles; and the skirts of my coat reached
to the middle of my leg; my waistcoat and breeches were of the same piece, and
cut in the same taste; my hat very much resembled a Barber's basin in the
shallowness of the crown and narrowness of the brims. Strap was habited in a
much less awkward manner than me; but a short crop eared wig that very much
resembled Scrub's in the play, and the knapsack on his back, added to what is
called a queer phiz, occasioned by a long chin, an hook nose, and high cheek
bones, rendered him on the whole a very fit subject of mirth and pleasantry. As
we walked along, Strap, at my desire, enquired of a carman whom we met,
whereabouts Mr. Cringer lived; -- and was answered by a stare accompanied with
the word, "Anan!" Upon which I came up in order to explain the question, but
had the misfortune to be unintelligible likewise, the carman damning us for a
lousy Scotch guard, and whipping up his horses with a "Gee ho!" which nettled
me to the quick, and roused the indignation of Strap so far, that after the
fellow was gone a good way, he told me he would fight him for a farthing. --
While we were deliberating what was next to be done, an hackney coachman
driving softly along, and perceiving us standing by the kennel, came up close
to us, and calling, "A coach, master!" by a dexterous management of the reins,
made his horses stumble in the wet, and bedaub us all over with mud. -- After
which, he drove on, applauding himself with a hearty laugh, in which several
people joined, to my great mortification; but one more compassionate than the
rest seeing us strangers, advised me to go into an alehouse, and dry myself. I
thanked him for his advice, which I immediately complied with; and going into
the house he pointed out, called for a pot of beer, and sat down by the fire in
a public room, where we cleaned ourselves as well as we could -- In the mean
time, a wag who sat in a box, smoking his pipe, understanding by our dialect
who we were, came up to me, and, with a very grave countenance, asked me, how
long I had been caught? As I did not know the meaning of his question, I made
no answer; and he went on, saying, it could not be a great while, for my tail
was not yet cut; at the same time taking hold of my hair, and tipping the wink
to the rest of the company, which seemed highly entertained with his wit. -- I
was incensed at this usage, but afraid of resenting it, because I happened to
be in a strange place, and perceived the person who spoke to me, was a brawny
fellow, for whom I was by no means a match. However, Strap having either more
courage or less caution, could not put up with the insults that I suffered; but
told him with a peremptory tone, "He was an uncivil fellow, for making so free
with his betters." -- Whereupon, the wit going toward him, asked, "What he had
got in his knapsack?" Is it oat-meal or brimstone, Sawney? (said he) seizing
him by the chin, which he shook to the inexpressible diversion of all present.
-- My companion feeling himself assaulted in such an opprobrious manner,
disengaged himself in a trice, and lent his antagonist such a box on the ear,
as made him stagger to the other side of the room; and in a moment, a ring was
formed for the combatants. -- Seeing Strap beginning to strip, and my blood
being heated with indignation, which banished all other thoughts, I undressed
myself to the skin in an instant, and declared, that as the affront that
occasioned the quarrel was offered to me, I would fight it out myself; upon
which one or two cried out, "That Is a brave Scotch boy; you shall have fair
play, by G -- d." This gave me fresh spirits, and going up to my adversary, who
by his pale countenance, did not seem much inclined to the battle, I struck him
so hard on the stomach that he reeled over a bench, and fell to the ground.
Here I attempted to get a-top of him in order to improve my success, according
to the manner of my own country; but was restrained by the spectators, one of
whom endeavored to raise up my opponent, but in vain; for he protested he
would not fight, not being quite recovered of a late illness. -- I was very
well pleased with this excuse, and immediately dressed myself, having acquired
the good opinion of the company for my bravery, as did also my comrade Strap,
who shook me by the hand and wished me joy of the victory. -- After having
drank our pot, and dried our clothes, we enquired of the landlord if he knew
Mr. Cringer the member of parliament, and were amazed at his replying in the
negative; for we imagined, he must be every bit as conspicuous here, as in the
borough he represented; but he told us we might possibly hear of him as we
passed along. -- Whereupon we betook ourselves to the street, where, seeing a
footman standing at a door, we made up to him, and asked if he knew where our
patron lived. -- This member of the party-colored sraternity, surveying us
both very minutely, said he knew Mr. Cringer very well, and bid us turn down
the first street on our left, then turn to the right, and then to the left
again, after which we would observe a lane, through which we must pass, and at
the other end we should find an alley that leads to another street, where we
should see the sign of the thistle and three pedlars, and there he lodged. --
We thanked him for his information, and went forwards, Strap telling me, that
he knew this person to be an honest friendly man by his countenance, before he
opened his mouth; in which opinion I acquiesced, ascribing his good manners to
the company he daily saw in the house where he served. -- We followed his
directions punctually, in turning to the left and to the right, and to the left
again; but instead of seeing a lane before us, we found ourselves at the side
of the river, which perplexed us not a little; and my fellow traveller ventured
to pronounce, that we had certainly missed our way. -- By this time we were
pretty much fatigued with our walk, and not knowing how to proceed, I went into
a sm^ll snuff-shop hard by, encouraged by the sign of the highlander, where I
found, to my inexpressible satisfaction, the shopkeeper my countryman. -- He
was no sooner informed of our peregrination, and the directions we had received
from the footman, than he informed us we had been imposed upon, telling us,
that Mr. Cringer lived in the other end of the town; and that it would be to no
purpose for us to go thither today, for by that time he was gone to the House.
-- I then asked him if he could recommend us to a lodging, which he readily
did, by giving us a line to one of his acquaintance who kept a chandler's shop
not far from St. Martin's Lane; here we hired a bed-room, up two pair of
stairs, at the rate of 2 s. per week, so very small, that when the bed was let
down, we were obliged to carry out every other piece of furniture that belonged
to the apartment, and use the bedstead by way of chairs. -- About dinnertime,
our landlord asked us how we proposed to live, to which we answered, that we
would be directed by him. -- "Well then (says he) there are two ways of eating
in this town, for people of your condition; the one more creditable and
expensive than the other: the first, is to dine at an eating-house frequented
by well dressed people only, and the other is called diving, practiced by those
who are either obliged or inclined to live frugally." -- I gave him to
understand that provided the last was not infamous, it would suit much better
with our circumstances than the other. -- "Infamous (cried he) God forbid,
there are many creditable people, and rich people, ay and fine people, that
dive every day. -- I have seen many a pretty gentleman bedaubed all over with
lace, dine in that manner, very comfortably for three pence halfpenny, and go
afterward to the coffee-house, where he made a figure with the best lord in
the land; -- but your own eyes shall bear witness. -- I will go along with you
today and introduce you." -- He accordingly carried us to a certain lane,
where stopping, he bid us observe him, and do as he did, and walking a few
paces, dived into a cellar and disappeared in an instant. -- I followed his
example, and descended very successfully, where I found myself in the middle of
a cook's shop, almost suffocated with the steams of boiled beef, and surrounded
by a company consisting chiefly of hackney-coachmen, chairmen, draymen, and a
few footmen out of place or on board wages; who sat eating shin of beef, tripe,
cow-heel or sausages, at separate boards, covered with cloths, which turned my
stomach. -- While I stood in amaze, undetermined whether to sit down or walk
upwards again, Strap, in his descent missing one of the steps, tumbled headlong
into this infernal ordinary, and overturned the cook as she was carrying a
porringer of soup to one of the guests: In her fall, she dashed the whole mess
against the legs of a drummer belonging to the foot guards, who happened to be
in her way, and scalded him so miserably, that he started up, and danced up and
down, uttering a volley of execrations that made my hair stand on end. While he
entertained the company in this manner, with an eloquence peculiar to himself,
the cook got up, and after a hearty curse on the poor author of this mischance,
who lay under the table scratching his rump with a woeful countenance, emptied a
saltseller in her hand, and stripping down the patient's stocking which brought
the skin along with it, applied the contents to the sore. -- This poultice was
scarce laid on, when the drummer, who had begun to abate of his exclamation,
broke forth into such a hideous yell, as made the whole company tremble; then
seizing a pewter pint-pot that stood by him, squeezed the sides of it together,
as if it had been made of pliant leather, grinding his teeth at the same time
with a most horrible grin. Guessing the cause of this violent transport, I bid
the woman wash off the salt, and bathe the part with oil, which she did, and
procured him immediate ease. But here another difficulty occurred, which was no
other than the landlady's insisting on his paying for the pot he had rendered
useless; he swore he would pay for nothing but what he had eat, and bid her be
thankful for his moderation, or else he would prosecute her for damages. --
Strap foreseeing it would all land at him, promised to satisfy the cook, and
called for a dram of gin to treat the drummer with, which entirely appeased
him, and composed all animosities. After this our landlord and we sat down at a
board, and dined upon shin of beef most deliciously; our reckoning amounting to
two pence halfpenny each, bread and small beer included.

CHAP. XIV.
We visit Strap's friend -- a description of him -- his advice -- we go to Mr.
Cringer's house -- are denied admittance -- an accident befalls Strap -- his
behavior thereupon -- an extraordinary adventure occurs, in the course of
which I lose all my money.

IN the afternoon, my companion proposed to to call at his friend's house,
which, we were informed, was in the neighborhood, whither we accordingly went,
and were so lucky as to find him at home. This gentleman, who had come from
Scotland three or four years ago, kept a school in town, where he taught the
Latin, French and Italian languages; but what he chiefly professed was the
pronounciation of the English tongue, after a method more speedy and uncommon
than any practiced heretofore; and indeed if his scholars spoke like their
master, the latter part of his undertaking was certainly performed to a tittle;
for although I could easily understand every word of what I had heard hitherto
since I entered England, three parts in four of his dialect were as
unintelligible to me, as if he had spoke in Arabic or Irish. -- He was a
middle-sized man, and stooped very much, though not above the age of forty; his
face was very much pitted with the smallpox, his eyes blear'd, and his mouth
extended from ear to ear. -- He was dressed in a nightgown of played, fastened
about his middle with a serjeant's old sash, and a tie-perriwig with a fore-top
three inches high, in the fashion of king Charles the second's reign. -- After
he had received Strap (who was related to him) very courteously, he enquired of
him, who I was: and being informed, took me by the hand, telling me, he was at
school with my father. -- When he understood my situation, he assured me that
he would do me all the service in his power, both by his advice and otherwise;
and while he spoke these words, he eyed me with great attention, walking round
me several times, and muttering, "O Ch -- st! O Ch -- st! fat a saight is
here?" -- I soon guessed the reason of of his ejaculation, and said, "I
suppose, sir, you are not pleased with my dress." -- "Dress, (answered he) you
may caal it fat you please, in your country, but I vaw to Gad, it is a
masquerade here. -- No christian will admit such a figure into his hawse. --
Upon my conscience! I wonder the dogs did not hunt you. -- Did you pass through
St. James's market? -- God bless my eye-saight! you look like a cousin-german
of Ouran Outang." -- I began to be a little serious at this discourse, and
asked him, if he thought I should obtain entrance tomorrow at the house Mr.
Cringer, on whom I chiefly depended, for an introduction into business. -- "Mr.
Cringer, Mr. Cringer (replied he, scratching his cheek) may be a very honest
gentleman -- I know nothing to the contrary; but is your sole dependence upon
him? -- Who recommended you to him?" -- I pulled out Mr. Crab's letter, and
told him the foundation of my hopes; at which he stared at me, and repeated, "O
Ch -- st!" -- I began to conceive bad omens from this behavior of his, and
begged he would assist me with his advice; which he promised to do very
frankly; and as a specimen, directed us to a perriwig warehouse, in the
neighborhood, in order to be accommodated; laying strong injunctions on me not
to appear before Mr. Cringer, till I had parted with these carroty locks, which
(he said) were sufficient to beget an antipathy against me, in all mankind. --
And as we were going to pursue this advice, he called me back, and bid me be
sure to deliver my letter into Mr. Cringer's own hand. -- As we walked along,
Strap triumphed greatly in our reception with his friend, who (it seems) had
assured him, he would in a day or two provide for him, with some good master;
and "now (says he) you shall see how I will fit you with a wig -- There Is never
a barber in London (and that is a bold word) can palm a rotten caul, or a
penny-weight of dead hair upon me." -- And indeed this zealous adherent did
wrangle so long with the merchant, that he was desired twenty times to leave
the shop, and see if he could get one cheaper elsewhere. At length I made
choice of a good handsome bob, for which I paid fifteen shillings; and returned
to our lodging, where Strap, in a moment, rid me of that hair which had given
the schoolmaster so much offense.

We got up next day betimes, having been informed that Mr. Cringer gave
audience by candlelight to all his dependants, he himself being obliged to
attend the levee of my lord Terrier, at break of day; because his lordship made
one at the minister's between eight and nine aclock. -- When we came to Mr.
Cringer's door, Strap, to give me an instance of his politeness, run to the
knocker, which he employed so loud and so long, that he alarmed the whole
street; and a window opening up two pair of stairs in the next house, a
chamber pot was discharged upon him so successfully, that the poor barber was
wet to the skin, while I, being luckily at some distance, escaped the unsavory
deluge. -- In the mean time, a footman opening the door, and seein no body in
the street but us, asked with a stern countenance, if it was I who made such a
damned noise, and what I wanted. -- I told him I had business with his master,
whom I desired to see. -- Upon which, he clapped the door in my face, telling me,
I must learn better manners before I could have access to his master. Vexed at
this disappointment, I turned my resentment against Strap, whom I sharply
reprimanded for his presumption; but he not in the least regarding what I said,
wrung the urine out of his perriwig, and lifting up a large stone, flung it
with such force against the street-door of that house from whence he had been
bedewed, that the lock giving way, it flew wide open, and he took to his heels,
leaving me to follow him as I could. -- Indeed there was no time for
deliberation; I therefore pursued him with all the speed I could exert, until
we found ourselves, about the dawn, in a street we did not know. Here as we
wandered along, gaping about, a very decent sort of a man, passing by me,
stopped of a sudden, and took up something, which having examined, he turned,
and presented it to me with these words, "Sir, you have dropped half a crown." --
I was not a little surprised at this instance of honesty, and told him, it did
not belong to me; but he bid me recollect and see if all my money was safe,
upon which I pulled out my purse (for I had bought one since I came to town)
and reckoning my money in my hand, which was now reduced to five guineas, seven
shillings and two pence, I assured him I had lost nothing. -- "Well then, (says
he) so much the better, -- this is Godsend -- and as you two were present when
I picked it up, you are entitled to equal shares with me." -- I was astonished
at these words, and looked upon this person to be a prodigy of integrity, but
absolutely refused any part of the sum. -- "Come, gentlemen, (said he) you are
too modest -- I see you are strangers -- but you shall give me leave to treat
you with a whet this cold raw morning." -- I would have declined this
invitation, but Strap whispered to me, that the gentleman would be affronted,
and I complied. -- "Where shall we go? (said the stranger) I am quite ignorant
of this part of the town." -- I informed him that we were in the same
situation: Upon which he proposed to go into the first public house we should
find open. As we walked together, he began in this manner: -- "I find by your
tongues you are come from Scotland, gentlemen. -- My grandmother by the
father's side was of your country, which has prepossessed me so much in its
favor, that I never meet a Scotchman but my heart warms. -- The Scots are a
very brave people. -- There is scarce a great family in the kingdom, that
cannot boast of some exploits performed by its ancestors many hundred years
ago. -- There Is your Douglasses, Gordons, Campbels, Hamiltons. -- We have no
such ancient families here in England. -- Then you are all very well educated.
-- I have known a pedlar talk in Greek and Hebrew, as well as if they had been
his mother tongue -- And for honesty -- I once had a servant, his name was
Gregory Macgregor, I would have trusted him with untold gold." -- This eulogium
on my native country, gained my affection so strongly, that I believe I could
have gone to death to serve the author; and Strap's eyes swam in tears. At
length, as we passed through a dark narrow lane, we perceived a public house,
which we entered; and found a man sitting by the fire, smoking a pipe with a
pint of purl before him. -- Our new acquaintance asked us, if ever we had drank
egg flip; to which we answering in the negative, he assured us of a regale, and
ordered a quart to be prepared, calling for pipes and tobacco at the same time.
We found this composition very palatable, and drank heartily; the conversation
(which was introduced by the gentleman) turning upon the snares that young
unexperienced people are exposed to in this metropolis. -- He described a
thousand cheats that are daily practiced upon the ignorant and unwary; and
warned us of them with so much goodnature and concern, that we blessed the
opportunity which threw us into his way. -- After we had put the cann about for
some time, our new friend began to yawn, telling us he had been up all night
with a sick person; and proposed we should have recourse to some diversion to
keep him awake. -- "Suppose (said he) we should take a hand at whist for
pastime -- But let me see, that will not do, there is only three of us; and I
cannot play at any other game -- The truth is, I seldom or never play, but out
of complaisance, or at such a time as this, when I am in danger of falling
asleep." -- Although I had no great inclination for gaming, I felt no aversion
to pass an hour or two at cards with a friend; and knowing that Strap
understood as much of the matter as I, made no scruple of saying, "I wish we
could find a fourth hand." -- While we were in this perplexity, the person whom
we found at our entrance, overhearing our discourse, took the pipe from his
mouth very gravely, and accosted us thus: "Gentlemen, my pipe is out, you see,
(shaking the ashes into the fire) and rather than you should be baulked, I
don't care if I take a hand with you, for a trifle, -- but remember I will not
play for any thing of consequence." -- We accepted his profer with pleasure;
and having cut for partners, it fell to my lot to play with him, against our
friend and Strap, for three pence a game. -- We were so successful, that in a
short time I was half a crown gainer; when the gentleman whom we had met in the
street observing he had no luck today, proposed to leave off, or change
partners. -- By this time I was inflamed with my good fortune, and the
expectation of improving it, as I perceived the two strangers played but
indifferently: therefore I voted for giving him his revenge, with which he
complied after some entreaty, and cutting again, Strap and I (to our mutual
satisfaction) happened to be partners. -- My good fortune attended me still,
and in less than an hour, we had got thirty shillings of their money; for as
they lost, they grew the keener and doubled stakes every time. At last the
inconstant goddess began to veer about, and we were very soon stripped of all our
gains, and about forty shillings of our own money. This mortified me extremely,
and had a visible effect on the muscles of Strap's face, which lengthened
apace; but our antagonists perceiving our condition, kindly permitted us to
retrieve our loss, and console ourselves with a new acquisition. -- Then my
companion wisely suggested it was time to begone; upon which, the person who
had joined us in the house began to curse the cards; and muttered that we were
indebted to fortune only for what we had got, no part of our success being
owing to our good play. -- This insinuation nettled me so much, that I
challenged him to continue the game for a crown; and he was with difficulty
persuaded to accept the invitation. -- This contest ended in less than an hour,
to my inexpressible affliction, who lost every shilling of my own money, Strap
absolutely refusing to supply me with a sixpence. -- The gentleman, at whose
request we had come in, perceiving by my disconsolate looks the situation of my
heart, which well nigh bursted with grief and resentment, when the other
stranger got up, and went away with my money; began in this manner: "I am truly
afflicted at your bad luck, and would willingly repair it, was it in my power.
-- But what in the name of goodness could provoke you to tempt your fate so
long? It is always a maxim with gamesters to pursue success as far as it will
go, and to stop whenever fortune shifts about. -- You are a young man, and your
passions too impetuous; you must learn to govern them better: -- However, there
is no experience like that which is bought; you will be the better for this the
longest day you have to live. -- As for the fellow who has got your money, I
don't half like him -- Did not you observe me tip you the wink, to leave off in
time?" -- I answered, No. "No, (continued he) you was too eager to mind any
thing but the game. -- But, harkee, (said he, in a whisper) are you satisfied
of that young man's honesty? his looks are a little suspicious; -- but I may be
mistaken; -- he made a great many grimaces while he stood behind you; -- this
is a very wicked town." -- I told him I was very well convinced of my comrade's
integrity, and that the grimaces he mentioned were doubtless owing to his
anxiety at my loss. -- "O ho! if that be the case, I ask his pardon. --
Landlord, see what is to pay." -- The reckoning came to eighteen pence, which
having discharged, the gentleman shook us both by the hand, and saying he
should be very glad to see us again, departed.

CHAP. XV.
Strap moralizes -- presents his purse to me -- we inform our landlord of my
misfortune, who unravels the mystery -- I present myself to Cringer -- he
recommends and turns me over to Mr. Staytape -- I become acquainted with a
fellow-dependant, who explains the characters of Cringer and Staytape -- and
informs me of the method to be pursued at the Navy office and Surgeon'shall --
Strap is employed.

IN our way to our lodging, after a profound silence on both sides, Strap with
a hideous groan observed, that we had brought our pigs to a fine market. To
this I made no reply, and he went on: "God send us well out of this place, we
have not been in London eight and forty hours, and I believe we have met with
eight and forty thousand misfortunes. -- We have been jeered, reproached,
buffetted, pissed upon, and at last stripped of our money; and I suppose by and
by we shall be stripped of our skins. -- Indeed, as to the money part of it, that
was owing to our own folly; Solomon says, Bray a fool in a mortar, and he will
never be wise. Ah! God help us, an ounce of prudence is worth a pound of gold."
This was no time for him to tamper with my disposition, already mad with my
loss, and inflamed with resentment against him, who had refused me a little
money to attempt to retrieve it. I therefore, turned toward him with a stern
countenance, and asked him, "Who he called fool!" Being altogether unaccustomed
with such looks from me, he stood still and stared in my face for some time;
then, with some confusion, uttered "Fool! -- I called no body fool but myself;
-- I am sure, I am the greatest fool of the two, for being so much concerned at
other people's misfortunes; -- but Nemo omnibus horis sapit. -- that is all --
that is all." -- Upon which a silence ensued that brought us to our lodging,
where I threw myself into the bed in an agony of despair, resolving to perish
for want, rather than apply to my companion or any other body for relief; but
Strap, who knew my temper, and whose heart bled within him at my distress,
after some pause, came to the bedside, and putting a leather purse into my
hand, burst into tears, crying, "I know what you think: but I scorn your
thoughts. -- There Is all I have in the world, take it, and I Will perhaps get
more for you before that be done -- if not, I Will beg for you, steal for you, go
through the wide world with you, and starve with you, for though I be a poor
cobler's son, I am no scout." -- I was so touched with the generous passion of
this poor creature, that I could not refrain from weeping also, and we mingled
our tears together for some time. -- Upon examining the purse, I found in it
two half guineas and half a crown, which I would have returned to him, saying,
he knew better than I how to manage it; but he absolutely refused my proposal,
and told me, it was more reasonable and decent that he should depend upon me
who was a gentleman, than that I should be controuled by him.

After this friendly contest was over, and our minds more at ease, we informed
our landlord of what had happened to us, taking care to conceal the extremity
to which we were reduced: He no sooner heard the story, than he assured us we
had been grievously imposed upon by a couple of sharpers, who were associates;
and that this polite, honest, friendly, humane person, who had treated us so
civilly, was no other than a rascally money-dropper, who made it his business
to decoy strangers in that manner, to one of his own haunts, where an
accomplice or two was always waiting to assist in pillaging the prey they had
run down. -- Here the good man recounted a great many stories of people who had
been seduced, cheated, pilfered, beat, -- nay, even murdered by such villains.
I was confounded at the artifice and wickedness of mankind, and Strap listing
up his eyes and hands to heaven, prayed that God would deliver him from scenes
of such iniquity; for surely the devil had set up his throne in London. -- Our
landlord being curious to know what reception we had met with at Mr. Cringer's,
we acquainted him with the particulars, at which he shook his head, and told
us, we had not gone the right way to work; that there was nothing to be done
with a m -- b -- r of p -- m -- t without a bribe: that the servant was
commonly infected with the master's disease, and expected to be paid for his
work, as well as his betters. -- He therefore advised me to give the footman a
shilling the next time I desired admittance to my patron, or else I should
scarce find an opportunity to deliver my letter. Accordingly, next morning,
when the door was opened, I slipped a shilling into his hand, and told him I had
a letter for his master. -- I found the good effects of my liberality; for the
fellow let me in immediately, and taking the letter out of my hand, desired me
to wait in a kind of passage, for an answer. In this place I continued standing
three quarters of an hour, during which time I saw a great many young fellows,
whom I formerly knew in Scotland, pass and repass, with an air of familiarity
in their way to and from the audience chamber: while I was fain to stand
shivering in the cold, and turn my back to them, that they might not perceive
the lowness of my condition. -- At length, Mr. Cringer came out to see a young
gentleman to the door, who was no other than 'squire Gawky, dressed in a very
gay suit of clothes: At parting Mr. Cringer shook him by the hand, and told him
he hoped to have the pleasure of his company at dinner. Then turning about
toward me, asked what were my commands: when he understood I was the person
who had brought the letter from Mr. Crab, he affected to recollect my name,
which however, he pretended he could not do, till he had consulted the letter
again; to save him that trouble, I told him my name was Random. -- Upon which
he went on, "Ay, ay, Random, Random, Random -- I think I remember the name;"
and very well he might, for this very individual Mr. Cringer had many a time
rode before my grandfather's cloak-bag, in quality of footman. -- "Well, (says
he) you propose to go on board a man of war, as surgeon's mate." To which I
replied by a low bow. "I believe it will be a difficult matter (continued he)
to procure a warrant, there being already such a swarm of Scotch surgeons at
the navy office, in expectation of the next vacancy, that the commissioners are
afraid of being torn in pieces, and have actually applied for a guard to
protect them. -- However, some ships will soon be put in commission, and then
we shall see what is to be done." -- So saying, he left me, exceedingly
mortified at the different reception Mr. Gawky and I had met with from this
upstart, proud, mean member, who (I imagined) would have thought it an
happiness to have it in his power to be grateful for the obligations he owed to
my family.

At my return, I was surprised with the agreeable news of Strap's being
employed on the recommendation of his friend the schoolmaster, by a
perriwig-maker in the neighborhood, who allowed him five shillings per week,
besides bed and board. -- I continued to dance attendance every other morning
at the levee of Mr. Cringer, during a fortnight, in which time I became
acquainted with a young fellow of my own country and profession, who also
depended on the member's interest; but was treated with much more respect than
I, both by the servants and master, being often admitted into a parlour, where
there was a fire, for the convenience of the better sort of those who waited
for him. -- Thither I was never permitted to penetrate on account of my
appearance, which was not at all fashionable; but was obliged to stand blowing
my fingers in a cold lobby, and take the first opportunity of Mr. Cringer's
going to the door, to speak with him. -- One day, while I enjoyed this
occasion, a person was introduced, whom Mr. Cringer no sooner saw, then running
toward him, he saluted him with a bow to the very ground, and afterward
shaking him by the hand with great heartiness and familiarity, called him his
good friend, and asked very kindly how Mrs. Staytape, and the young ladies did;
then, after a whisper which continued some minutes, wherein I overheard the
word Honor repeated several times with great emphasis, Mr. Cringer introduced
me to this gentleman, as to a person whose advice and assistance I might depend
upon, and having given me his direction, followed me to the door, where he told
me, I needed not give myself the trouble to call at his house any more, for Mr.
Staytape would do my business for me. At that instant my fellow dependant
coming out after me, overheard the discourse of Mr. Cringer, and making up to
me in the street, accosted me very civilly, which I looked upon as no small
honor, considering the figure he made; for he was dressed in a blue frock with
a gold button, a green silk waistcoat trimmed with gold, black velvet breeches,
white silk stockings, silver buckles, a gold-laced hat, a spencer wig, and a
silver hilted hanger, with a fine clouded cane in his hand. -- "I perceive
(says he) you are but lately come from Scotland: -- pray what may your business
with Mr. Cringer be? -- I suppose it is no secret -- and I may possibly give
you some advice that will be serviceable; for I have been surgeon's second mate
on board of a seventy-gun ship, and consequently know a good deal of the
world." -- I made no scruple to disclose my situation, which when he had
learned, he shook his head, and told me he had been pretty much in the same
circumstances about a year ago; that he had relied on Cringer's promises so
long, that his money (which was considerable) as well as his credit, was quite
exhausted; and when he wrote to his relations for a fresh supply, instead of
money, he received nothing but reproaches, and the epithets of idle, debauched
fellow: That after he had waited at the Navy-Office many months for a warrant,
to no purpose, he was fain to pawn some of his clothes, which raised him a
small sum, wherewith he bribed the s -- t -- y, who soon procured a warrant for
him, notwithstanding he had affirmed the same day, that there was not one
vacancy. -- That he had gone on board, where he remained nine months; at the
end of which the ship was put out of commission, and the company to be paid off
in Broad-street the very next day. -- That his relations being reconciled to
him, had charged him to pay his devoirs regularly to Mr. Cringer, who had
informed them by letter, that his interest alone had procured the warrant; in
obedience to which command, he came to his levee every morning as I saw, though
he looked upon him to be a very pitiful scoundrel -- In conclusion, he asked me
if I had yet passed at Surgeon's-Hall? To which I answered, I did not so much
as know it was necessary -- "Necessary! (cried he) O lord, O lord! I find I
must instruct you -- come along with me, and I Will give you some information
about that matter." -- So saying, he carried me into an alehouse, where he
called for some beer and bread and cheese, on which we breakfasted. While we
sat in this place, he told me I must first go to the Navy-Office, and write to
the board, desiring them to order a letter for me to the Surgeon's-Hall, that I
may be examined touching my skill in surgery: That the Surgeons, after having
examined me, would give me my qualification sealed up in form of a letter
directed to the commissioners, which qualification I must deliver to the
secretary of the board, who would open it in my presence, and read the
contents. After which, I must employ my interest to be provided for as soon as
possible -- That the expense of his qualification for second mate of a third
rate, amounted to thirteen shillings, exclusive of the warrant, which cost him
half a guinea and half a crown, besides the present to the secretary, which
consisted of a three pound twelve piece. -- This calculation was like a
thunderbolt to me, whose whole fortune did not amount to twelve shillings -- I
accordingly made him acquainted with this part of my distress, after having
thanked him for his information and advice. -- He condoled with me on this
occasion; but bid me be of good cheer, for he had conceived a friendship for
me, and would make all things easy. -- It Is true he was run out at present, but
tomorrow or next day, he was certain of receiving a considerable sum; of which
he would lend me what would be sufficient to answer my exigences. This frank
declaration pleased me so much, that I pulled out my purse and emptied it
before him, begging him to take what he pleased for pocket expense until he
should receive his own money. -- With a good deal of pressing he was prevailed
upon to take five shillings, telling me that he might have what money he
pleased at any time, for the trouble of going into the city; but as he had met
with me, he would deser his going thither till tomorrow, when I should go
along with him, and he would put me in a way of acting for myself, without a
servile dependence on that rascal Cringer, much less on the lousy tailor to
whom I heard him turn you over. -- "How (cried I) is Mr. Staytape a tailor?" --
"No less, I Will assure you (answered he) and I confess, more likely to serve you
than the member: For provided you can entertain him with politics and
conundrums, you may have credit with him for as many and as rich clothes as you
please." -- I told him, I was utterly ignorant of both, and so incensed at
Cringer's usage, that I would never set my foot within his door again. -- After
a good deal more conversation, my new acquaintance and I parted, having made an
appointment to meet next day at the same place, in order to set out for the
city. -- I went immediately to Strap, and related every thing which had
happened, but he did not at all approve of my being so forward to lend money to
a stranger, especially as we had been already so much imposed upon by
appearances. "However, (said he) if you are sure he is a Scotchman, I believe
you are safe."

CHAP. XVI.
My new acquaintance breaks an appointment -- I proceed, by myself, to the
Navy-Office -- address myself to a Person there, who assists me with his advice
-- I write to the board -- they grant me a letter to the Surgeons at the Hall
-- I am informed of the beau's name and character -- I find him -- he makes me
his confident in an amor -- desires me to pawn my linen, for his occasions --
I recover what I lent him -- some curious observations of Strap on that
occasion -- his vanity.

IN the morning I got up and went to the place of rendezvous, where I waited
two hours in vain; and was so exasperated against him for breaking his
appointment, that I set out for the city by myself, in hopes of finding the
villain, and being revenged on him for his perfidy. -- At length I found myself
at the Navy-Office, which I entered, and saw crowds of young fellows walking
below; many of whom made no better appearance than myself -- I consulted the
physiognomy of each, and at last made up to one whose countenance I liked; and
asked, if he could instruct me in the form of the letter which was to be sent
to the board, to obtain an order for examination: He answered me in broad
Scotch, that he would show me the copy of what he had wrote for himself, by the
direction of another who knew the form: And accordingly pulled it out of his
pocket for my perusal; and told me, that if I was expeditious, I might send it
in to the board before dinner, for they did no business in the afternoon. He
then went with me to a coffee-house hard by, where I wrote the letter, which
was immediately delivered to the messenger; who told me, I might expect an
order tomorrow about the same time. -- Having transacted this piece of
business, my mind was a good deal composed; and as I had met with so much
civility from this stranger, I desired further acquaintance with him, fully
resolved however, not to be deceived by him so much to my prejudice as I had
been by the beau -- He agreed to dine with me at the cook's shop which I
frequented; and on our way thither, carried me to 'Change, where I was in some
hopes of finding Mr. Jackson (for that was the name of the person who had broke
his appointment) -- I sought him there to no purpose, and on our way to the
other end of the town, imparted to my companion his behavior toward me: Upon
which, he gave me to understand, that he was no stranger to the name of beau
Jackson (so he was called at the Navy-Office) although he did not know him
personally; that he had the character of a good-natured careless fellow, who
made no scruple of borrowing from any body that would lend; that most people
who knew him, believed he had a good enough principle at the bottom; but his
extravagance was such, he would probably never have it in his power to manifest
the honesty of his intention. -- This account made me sweat for my five
shillings, which I nevertheless did not altogether despair of recovering,
provided I could find out the debtor. -- This young man likewise added another
circumstance of 'Squire Jackson's history, which was, that being destitute of
all means to equip him for sea, when he received his last warrant, he had been
recommended to a person who lent him a little money, after he had signed a will
and power, entitling that person to lift his wages when they should become due,
as also to inherit his effects in case of his death. -- That he was still under
the tutorage and direction of that gentleman, who advanced him small sums from
time to time upon this security, at the rate of 50 per cent. But at present his
credit was very low, because his funds would do little more than pay what he
had already received; this moderate interest included. -- After the stranger
(whose name was Thomson) had entertained me with this account of Jackson, he
informed me, that he himself had passed for a third mate of a third rate, about
four months ago; since which time, he had constantly attended at the
Navy-Office, in hopes of a warrant, having been assured from the beginning,
both by a Scotch member and one of the commissioners to whom the member
recommended him, that he should be put into the first vacancy; notwithstanding
which promise, he had had the mortification to see six or seven appointed in
the same station almost every week -- that now being utterly impoverished, his
sole hope consisted in the promise of a friend lately come to town, to lend him
a small matter, for a present to the s -- t -- y; without which he was
persuaded he might wait a thousand years to no purpose. -- I conceived a mighty
liking for this young fellow, which (I believe) proceeded from the similitude
of our fortunes: We spent the whole day together; and as he lived at Wapping. I
desired him to take a share of my bed. -- Next day we returned to the
Navy-Office, where, after being called before the board and questioned about
the place of my nativity and education, they ordered a letter to be made out
for me, which, upon paying half a crown to the clerk, I received, and delivered
into the hands of the clerk at Surgeon's-Hall, together with a shilling for his
trouble in registering my name. -- By this time my whole stock was diminished
to two shillings, and I saw not the least prospect of relief, even for present
subsistence, much less to enable me to pay the fees at Surgeon's-Hall for my
examination, which was to happen in a fortnight. -- In this state of
perplexity, I consulted Strap, who assured me, he would pawn every thing he had
in the world, even to his razors, before I should want: but this I absolutely
rejected, telling him, I would a thousand times rather list for a soldier, of
which I had some thoughts, than be any longer a burden to him. -- At the word
soldier, he grew pale as death, and begged on his knees, I would think no more
of that scheme. "God preserve us all in our right wits! (cried he) would you
turn soldier, and perhaps be sent abroad against the Spaniards, where you must
stand and be shot at like a woodcock? -- Heaven keep cold lead out of my
carcass! and let me die in a bed like a christian, as all my forefathers have
done. -- What signifies all the riches and honors of this life, if one enjoys
not content -- And in the next, there is no respect of persons. Better be a
poor honest Barber with a good conscience, and time to repent of my sins upon
my death bed, than be cut off (God bless us) by a musket shot, as it were in
the very flower of one's age, in the pursuit of riches and fame. -- What
signifies riches (my dear friend!) do they not make unto themselves wings, as
the wiseman says; and does not Horace observe, " Non domus aut fundus, non
aeris accrvus aut duri Aegroto domini deduxit corpore febrem, non animo curas.
-- I could moreover mention many other sayings in contempt of riches, both from
the bible and other good books; but as I know you are not very fond of these
things, I shall only assure you, that if you take on to be a soldier, I will do
the same; and then if we should both be slain, you will not only have your own
blood to answer for, but mine also: And peradventure the lives of all those
whom we shall kill in battle. -- Therefore I pray you, consider whether you
will sit down contented with small things, and share the fruits of my industry
in peace, 'till providence shall send better tidings; or by your despair,
plunge both our souls and bodies into everlasting perdition, which God of his
infinite mercy forbid." -- I could not help smiling at this harangue, which was
delivered with great earnestness, the tears standing in his eyes all the time;
and promised to do nothing of that sort without his consent and concurrence. --
He was much comforted with this declaration; and told me, in a few days he
should receive a week's wages which should be at my service, but advised me in
the mean time, to go in quest of Jackson, and recover, if possible, what he had
borrowed of me. -- I accordingly trudged about from one end of the town to the
other, for several days, without being able to learn any thing certain
concerning him: And, one day, being extremely hungry and allured by the steams
that regaled my nostrils from a boiling cellar, I went down with an intention
to gratify my appetite with two-penny worth of beef; when, to my no small
surprise, I found Mr. Jackson sitting at dinner with a footman -- He no sooner
perceived me than he got up, and shook me by the hand, saying, "He was glad to
see me, for he intended to have called at my lodgings in the afternoon." -- I
was so well pleased with this rencounter, and the apologies he made for not
keeping his appointment, that I forgot my resentment, and sat down to dinner,
with the happy expectation of not only recovering my own money before we should
part, but also reaping the benefit of his promise to lend me wherewithal to
pass examination; and this my sanguine complexion suggested, notwithstanding
the account Thompson gave me of him, ought to have taught me better. -- When we
had feasted sumptuously, he took his leave of the footman, and adjourned with
me to an alehouse hard by, where after shaking me by the hand again, he began
thus, "I suppose you think me a sad dog, Mr. Random, and I do confess that
appearances are against me -- but I dare say you will forgive me when I tell
you, my not coming at the time appointed, was owing to a peremptory message, I
received from a certain lady, whom -- harkee (but this is a great secret) I am
to marry very soon -- You think this strange perhaps, but it is not less true
for all that -- a five thousand pounder, I Will assure you, besides expectations
-- For my own part, devil take me if I know what any woman can see engaging
about me -- but a whim you know, -- and then one would not baulk one's good
fortune -- You saw that footman who dined with us -- he is one of the honestest
fellows that ever wore livery -- You must know, it was by his means, I was
introduced to her, for he made me first acquainted with her woman, who is his
mistress -- ay, many a crown has he and his sweetheart had of my money -- but
what of that! things are now brought to a bearing. -- I have -- (come a little
this way) I have proposed marriage, and the day is fixed -- she is a charming
creature! and writes like an angel -- O lord! she can repeat all the English
tragedies as well as ever a player in Drury Lane; and indeed is so fond of
plays, that to be near the stage, she has taken lodgings in a court hard by the
theater -- But you shall see -- you shall see -- here is the last letter she
sent me." -- With these words he put it into my hand, and I read (to the best
of my remembrance as follows:

Dire creatur,
AS you are the animable hopjack of my contempleshons, your aydear is
constantanously skimming before my kimmerical fancy, when morfeus sheds
illeusinary puppies upon the I's of dreeming mortels; and when lustroos febus
shines from his kotidian throne: Wheerpon, I shall consceif old whorie time has
lost his pinners, as also cubit his harrows, until thou enjoy sweet slumbrs in
the lovesick harrums of thy faithful to commend 'till death.

CLAYRENDER.
Vingar-yard Droory-lane, January 12th.

While I was reading, he seemed to be in an ecstasy, rubbing his hands, and
bursting out into fits of laughter; at last he caught hold of my hand, and
squeezing it, cried out, "There is style for you! what do you think of this
billet doux?" I answered, "It might be sublime for aught I knew, for it was
altogether above my comprehension." -- "O ho! (said he) I believe it is -- both
tender and sublime -- she is a divine creature! and so doats upon me! -- Let me
see -- what shall I do with this money, when I have once got it into my hands?
-- In the first place I shall do for you -- I Am a man of few words -- but, say
no more -- that is determined -- Whether would you advise me to purchase some
post, by which I may rise in the state; or lay out my wife's fortune in land,
and retire to the country at once?" I gave my opinion without hesitation, that
he could not do better than buy an estate and improve it; especially since he
had already seen so much of the world. Then I launched out into the praises of
a country life, as described by the poets whose works I had read -- He seemed
to relish my advice, but withal told me, that although he had seen a great deal
of the world both at land and sea, having cruiz'd three whole months in the
channel, yet he should not be satisfied until he had visited France, which he
proposed to do before he should settle; and to carry his wife along with him.
-- I had nothing to object to his proposal; and asked him, how soon he hoped to
be happy. -- "As to that (replied he) nothing obstructs my happiness, but the
want of a little ready cash -- for you must know, my friend in the city has
gone out of town for a week or two; and I unfortunately missed my pay at
Broad-street, by being detained too long by the dear charmer -- but there will
be a recall at Chatham next week, whither the ship's books are sent, and I have
commissioned a friend in that place to receive the money." -- "If that be all
(said I) there is no great harm in deferring your marriage a few days." -- "Yes,
faith! but there is (replied he) you don't know how many rivals I have, who
would take all advantages against me -- I would not baulk the impatience of her
passion for the world -- the least appearance of coldness and indifference
would ruin all: and such offers don't occur every day." I acquiesc'd in this
observation, and inquired how he intended to proceed: At this he rubbed his
chin, and said, "Why, truly I must be obliged to some friend or other -- do you
know nobody that would lend me a small sum for a day or two?" -- I assured him,
I was such an utter stranger in London, that I did not believe I could borrow a
guinea, if my life depended upon it. -- "No (said he) that is hard -- that is
hard -- I wish I had any thing to pawn upon my soul! you have got excellent
linen (feeling the sleeve of my shirt) how many shirts of that kind have you
got?" -- I answered, "six ruffled and six plain." -- At which (...) testified
great surprise, and swore that no gentleman ought to have more than four --
"How many do you think I have got (continued he;) but this and another as I hope
to be saved! -- I dare say we shall be able to raise a good firm out of your
superfluity -- let me see -- let me see -- each of these shirts are worth
eighteen shillings at a moderate computation -- now suppose we pawn them for
half price -- eight times eight is sixty-four, that is three pound four -- z --
ds! it will do -- give me your hand." -- "Softly, softly, Mr. Jackson (said I)
don't dispose of my linen without my consent: first pay me the crown you owe
me, and then we shall talk of other matters." -- He protested he had not above
one shilling in his pocket, but that he would pay me out of the first money
raised from the shirts -- This piece of assurance incensed me so much, that I
swore I would not part with him until I had received satisfaction for what I
had lent him, and as for the shirts I would not pawn one of them to save him
from the gallows. -- At this expression he laughed aloud, and then complained,
it was damned hard, that I should refuse him a trifle, that would infallibly
enable him not only to make his own fortune, but mine also. -- "You talk of
pawning my shirts (said I) what would you think of selling this hanger, Mr.
Jackson? I believe it would fetch a good round sum." -- "No, hang it (said he)
I cannot appear decently without my hanger, or by G -- d it should go." --
However, seeing me inflexible with regard to my linen, he at length unbuckled
his hanger, and showing me the sign of three blue balls, desired me to carry it
thither and pawn it for two guineas. -- This office I would by no means have
performed, had I seen any likelihood of having my money otherwise; but not
willing, out of a piece of false delicacy, to neglect the only opportunity I
should, perhaps, ever have, I ventured into a pawn-broker's shop, where I
demanded two guineas on the pledge, in the name of Thomas Williams. -- "Two
guineas, (said the pawn-broker, looking at the hanger) this piece of goods has
been here several times before, for thirty shillings; however, since I believe
the gentleman to whom it belongs will redeem it, he shall have what he wants;"
and accordingly he paid me the money, which I carried to the house where I had
left Jackson, and calling for change, I counted out to him seven and thirty
shillings, reserving the other five for myself. -- After looking at the money
some time, he said, "D -- n it! it don't signify -- this will not do my business;
so you may as well take half a guinea or a whole one, as the five shillings you
have kept." -- I thanked him kindly, but refused to accept of any more than was
my due, because I had no prospect of repaying it. -- Upon which he stared in my
face, and told me, I was excessively raw, or I would not talk in that manner.
-- "Blood! (cried he) I have a very bad opinion of a young fellow who will not
borrow of his friend, when he is in want -- it is the sign of a speaking spirit.
-- Come, come, Random, give me back the five shillings, and take this half
guinea, and if ever you are able to pay me, I believe you will; if not, d -- n
me, if ever I ask it." -- When I reflected on my present necessity, I suffered
myself to be persuaded, and after making my acknowledgments to Mr. Jackson, who
offered to treat me with a play, I returned to my lodgings with a much better
opinion of this gentleman than I had in the morning: and at night, imparted my
day's adventure to Strap, who rejoiced at my good luck, saying, "I told you, if
he was a Scotchman you was safe enough -- and who knows but this marriage may
make us all. -- You have heard, I suppose, as how a countryman of ours, a
journeyman baker, run away with a great lady of this town, and now keeps his
coach -- Ecod! I say nothing; but yesterday morning as I was shaving a
gentleman at his own house, there was a young lady in the room -- a fine buxom
wench, in faith! and she threw so many sheep's eyes at a certain person, whom I
shall not name, that my heart went knock, knock, knock, like a fulling mill,
and my hand sh -- sh -- shook so much that I sliced a piece of skin off the
gentleman's nose; whereby he swore a deadly oath, and was going to horsewhip
me, when she prevented him, and made my peace. -- Omen haud malum! Is not a
journeyman barber as good as a journeyman baker? The only difference is, the
baker uses flour for the belly, and the barber uses it for the head: and as the
head is a more noble member than the belly, so is a barber more noble than a
baker -- for what is the belly without the head? -- Besides, I am told he could
neither read nor write; now you know I can do both: And moreover speak Latin.
-- But I will say no more, for I despise vanity -- nothing is more vain than
vanity." -- With these words he pulled out of his pocket a wax candle's end,
which he applied to his forehead; and upon examination, I found he had combed
his own hair over the toupee of his wig, and was indeed in his whole dress
become a very smart shaver. -- I congratulated him on his prospect with a
satirical smile, which he understood very well; and shaking his head, observed
I had very little faith, but the truth would come to light in spite of my
incredulity.

CHAP. XVII.
I go to Surgeon's-hall, where I meet with Mr. Jackson -- I am examined -- a
fierce dispute arises between two of the examiners -- Jackson disguises himself
to attract respect -- is detected -- in hazard of being sent to Bridewell -- he
treats us at a tavern -- carries us to a night-house a troublesome adventure
there -- we are committed to the Round house -- carried before a justice -- his
behavior.

WITH the assistance of this faithful adherent, who gave me almost all the
money he earned, I preserved my half guinea entire, till the day of
examination, when I went with a trembling heart to Surgeon's-hall, in order to
undergo that ceremony. -- Among a crowd of young fellows who walked in the
outward hall. I perceived Mr. Jackson, to whom I immediately went up, and
enquiring into the state of his amor, understood it was still undetermined by
reason of his friend's absence, and the delay of the recall at Chatham, which
put it out of his power to bring it to a conclusion. -- I then asked what his
business was in this place; to which he replied, he was resolved to have
two-strings to his bow, that in case the one ^iled he might use the other; and
with this view, he was to pass that night for a higher qualification. -- At
that instant a young fellow came out from the place of examination, with a pale
countenance, his lip quivering, and his looks as wild as if he had seen a
ghost. -- He no sooner appeared, than we all flocked about him with the utmost
eagerness to know what reception he had met with; which (after some pause) he
described, recounting all the questions they had asked, with the answers he
made. In this manner, we obliged no less than twelve to recapitulate, which,
now the danger was past, they did with pleasure, before it fell to my lot: At
length the beadle called my name, with a voice that made me tremble, as much as
if it had been the last trumpet: However, there was no remedy, I was conducted
into a large hall, where I saw about a dozen of grim faces sitting at a long
table. One of whom bid me come forward in such an imperious tone, that I was
actually for a minute or two bereft of my senses. -- The first question he put
to me was, "Where was you born?" To which I answered, In Scotland. -- "In
Scotland (said he) I know that very well -- we have scarce any other countrymen
to examine here -- you Scotchmen have overspread us of late as the locusts did
Egypt: -- I ask you in what part of Scotland was you born?" -- I named the
place of my nativity, which he had never before heard of: He then proceeded to
interrogate me about my age, the town where I served my time, with the term of
my apprenticeship; and when I had informed him that I served three years only,
he fell into a violent passion; swore it was a shame and a scandal to send such
raw boys into the world as surgeons; that it was great presumption in me, and
an affront upon the English, to pretend to sufficient skill in my business,
having served so short a time, when every apprentice in England was bound seven
years at least; -- that my friends had done better if they had made me a weaver
or shoemaker, but their pride would have me a gentleman (he supposed) at any
rate, and their poverty could not afford the necessary education. -- This
exordium did not at all contribute to the recovery of my spirits, but on the
contrary, reduced me to such a situation that I was scarce able to stand; which
being perceived by a plump gentleman, who sat opposite to me, with a skull
before him, he said Mr. Snarler was too severe upon the young man; and turning
toward me, told me, I need not be afraid, for no body would do me any harm;
then bidding me take time to recollect myself, he examined me touching the
operation of the trepan, and was very well satisfied with my answers. -- The
next person who questioned me was a wag, who began by asking me if I had ever
seen amputation performed; to which I replying in the affirmative, he shook his
head and said, "What! upon a dead subject, I suppose? If (continued he) during
an engagement at sea, a man should be brought to you with his head shot off,
how would you behave?" -- After some hesitation, I owned, such a case had never
come under my observation; neither did I remember to have seen any method of
cure proposed for such an accident, in any of the systems of surgery I had
perused. Whether it was owing to the simplicity of my answer, or the archness
of the question, I know not, but every member at the board deigned to smile,
except Mr. Snarler, who seemed to have very little of the animal risibile in
his constitution. -- The facetious member, encouraged by the success of his
last joke, went on thus: "Suppose you was called to a patient of a plethoric
habit, who had been bruised by a fall, what would you do?" I answered, I would
bleed him immediately. "What, (said he) before you tied up his arm?" -- But
this stroke of wit not answering his expectation, he desired me to advance to
the gentleman who sat next him; and who with a pert air, asked what method of
cure I would follow in wounds of the intestines. -- I repeated the method of
cure as it is prescribed by the best chirurgical writers; which he heard to an
end, and then said with a supercilious smile. "So, you think with such
treatment the patient might recover?" -- I told him I saw nothing to make me
think otherwise. -- "That may be (resumed he) I will not answer for your
foresight; -- but did you ever know a case of this kind succeed?" I
acknowledged I did not; and was about to tell him I had never seen a wounded
intestine; but he stopped me, by saying with some precipitation, "Nor never will.
-- I affirm, that all wounds of the intestines, whether great or small, are
mortal." -- "Pardon me, brother (says the fat gentleman) there is very good
authority" -- Here he was interrupted by the other, with "Sir, excuse me, I
despise all authority. -- Nullius in verba. -- I stand upon my own bottom." --
"But Sir, Sir, (replied his antagonist) the reason of the thing shows" -- "A
fig for reason (cried this sufficient member) I laugh at reason, give me ocular
demonstration." -- The corpulent gentleman began to wax warm, and observed that
no man acquainted with the anatomy of the parts, would advance such an
extravagant assertion. -- This inuendo enraged the other so much, that he
started up, and in a furious tone exclaimed: "What Sir! do you question my
knowledge in anatomy?" -- By this time, all the examiners had espoused the
opinion of one or other of the disputants, and raised their voices all
together, when the chairman commanded silence and ordered me to withdraw. In
less than a quarter of an hour, I was called in again, and received my
qualification sealed up, and was ordered to pay five shillings. -- I laid down
my half-guinea upon the table, and stood some time, until one of them bid me
begone; to this I replied, I will, when I have got my change; upon which
another threw me five shillings and sixpence, saying, I would not be a true
Scotchman if I went away without my change. I was afterward obliged to give
three shillings and sixpence to the beadles, and a shilling to an old woman
who swept the hall: This disbursement sunk my finances to thirteen pence
halfpenny, with which I was sneaking off, when Jackson perceiving it, came up
to me, and begged I would tarry for him and he would accompany me to the other
end of the town, as soon as his examination should be over. I could not refuse
this to a person that was so much my friend; but I was astonished at the change
of his dress, which was varied in half an hour from what I have already
described, to a very grotesque fashion. -- His head was covered with an old
smoaked tye-wig that did not boast one crooked hair, and a sloutched hat over
it, which would have very well become a chimney-sweeper or a dust-man; -- his
neck was adorned with a black crape, the ends of which he had twisted, and
fixed in the button-hole of a shabby great coat that wrapped up his whole body;
his white silk stockings were converted into black worsted hose; and his
countenance was rendered venerable by wrinkles, and a beard of his own
painting. -- When I expressed my surprise at this metamorphosis, he laughed,
and told me, it was done by the advice and assistance of a friend who lived
over the way, and would certainly produce something very much to his advantage;
for it gave him the appearance of age, which never fails of attracting respect.
I applauded his sagacity, and waited with impatience, for the effects of it. At
length he was called in, but whether the odness of his appearance excited a
curiosity more than usual in the board, or his behavior was not suitable to
his figure, I know not, he was discovered to be an impostor, and put into the
hands of the beadle, in order to be sent to Bridewell. So that instead of
seeing him come out with a cheerful countenance, and a surgeon's qualification
in his hand, I perceived him led through the outward hall as a prisoner; and
was very much alarmed and anxious to know the occasion; when he called with a
lamentable voice and piteous aspect, to me, and some others who knew him; "For
God's sake, gentlemen, bear witness that I am the same individual John Jackson,
who served as surgeon's second mate on board the Elizabeth, or else I shall go
to Bridewell." -- It would have been impossible for the most austere hermit
that ever lived, to have refrained from laughing at his appearance and address;
we therefore indulged ourselves a good while at his expense, and afterward
pleaded his cause so effectually with the beadle, who was gratified with half a
crown, that the prisoner was dismissed; and in a few moments resumed his former
gaiety; -- swearing, since the board had refused his money, he would spend it
every shilling before he went to bed in treating his friends; at the same time
inviting us all to favor him with our company. -- It was now ten of clock at
night, and as I had a great way to walk in a town where I was a stranger, I was
prevailed upon to be of their party, in hopes he would afterward accompany me
to my lodgings, which he faithfully promised. -- He carried us to his friend's
house, who kept a tavern over the way, where we remained drinking punch, until
the liquor mounted up to our heads, and made us all extremely frolicksome: I,
in particular was so much elevated, that nothing would serve me but a wench, at
which Jackson expressed much joy, and assured me I should have my desire before
we parted. -- Accordingly, when he had paid the reckoning we sallied out,
roaring and singing; and were conducted by our leader to a place of nocturnal
entertainment, where I immediately attached myself to a fair one, with whom I
proposed to spend the remaining part of the night; but she not relishing my
appearance, refused to grant my request before I had made her an
acknowledgment, which not suiting my circumstances we broke off our
correspondence, to my no small mortification and resentment, because I thought
the mercenary creature had not done justice to my merit. -- In the mean time,
Mr. Jackson's dress had attracted the inclinations and assiduities of two or
three nymphs, who loaded him with caresses, in return for the arrack punch with
which he treated them; till at length, notwithstanding the sprightly sallies of
these charmers, sleep began to exert his power over us all: and our conductor
called, "To pay." When the bill was brought, which amounted to twelve
shillings, he put his hand in his pocket, but might have saved himself the
trouble, for his purse was gone. -- This accident disconcerted him a good deal
at first, but after some recollection he seized the two Dulcineas, who sat by
him, one in each hand; and swore if they did not immediately restore his money,
he would charge a constable with them. -- The good lady at the bar seeing what
passed, whispered something to the drawer, who went out; and then with great
composure, asked what was the matter? -- Jackson told her he was robbed, and if
she refused him satisfaction, he would have her and her whores committed to
Bridewell. -- "Robbed (cried she) robbed, in my house! gentlemen and ladies I
take you all to witness, this person has scandalized my reputation." -- At that
instant, seeing the constable and watch enter, she went on, "What! you must not
only endeavor by your false aspersions to ruin my character; but even commit
an assault against my family? Mr. Constable, I charge you with this uncivil
person, who has been guilty of a riot here, I shall take care and bring an
action against him for desamation." -- While I was reflecting on this
melancholy event, which had made me quite sober, the lady whose favors I had
solicited, being piqued at some repartee that passed between us, cried, "They
are all concerned;" and desired the constable to take us all into custody,
which was performed instantly, to the utter astonishment and despair of us all,
except Jackson, who having been often in such scrapes was very little
concerned, and charged the constable in his turn, with the landlady and her
whole bevy: Upon which we were carried all together prisoners to the
round-house; where Jackson (after a word of comfort to us) informed the
constable of his being robbed, to which he said he would swear next morning
before the justice. -- "Ay, ay, (says the bawd) we shall see whose oath will
most signify." -- In a little time the constable calling Jackson into another
room, spoke to him thus: "I perceive that you and your company are strangers,
and am very sorry for your being involved in such an ugly business as this is,
I have known this woman a great while; she has kept a notorious house in the
neighborhood these many years; and although often complained of as a nuisance,
still escapes through her interest with the J -- t -- ces, to whom she and all of
her employment, pay contribution quarterly for protection. -- As she charged me
with you first, her complaint will have the preference, and she can procure
evidence to swear whatever she shall please to desire them. So that, unless you
make it up before morning, you and your companions may think yourselves happily
quit for a month's hard labor in Bridewell. -- Nay, if she should swear a
robbery or assault against you, you will be committed to Newgate, and tried
next sessions at the Old Bailey for your life." This last piece of information
had such an effect upon Jackson, that he agreed to make it up, provided his
money might be restored: The constable told him, that instead of restoring what
they had stolen, he was pretty certain, it would cost him some more before they
would come to any composition. -- But however, he had compassion on him, and
would, if he pleased, sound them about a mutual release. -- The unfortunate
beau thanked him for his friendship, and returned to us, where he acquainted us
with the substance of this dialogue; while the constable desiring to speak in
private with our adversary, carried her into the next room, and pleaded our
cause so effectually, that she condescended to make him umpire: He accordingly
proposed an arbitration, to which we gave our assent; and he fined each party
in three shillings to be laid out in a bowl or punch, wherein we drowned all
animosities, to the inexpressible joy of my two late acquaintances and me, who
had been in the state of the damned ever since Jackson mentioned Bridewell and
Newgate. -- By the time we had finished our bowl, to which, by the by, I had
contributed my last shilling, it was morning; and I proposed to move homeward,
when the constable gave me to understand, he could discharge no prisoners but
by order of the justice, before whom we must appear. -- This renewed my regret,
and I coursed the hour in which I had yielded to Jackson's invitation. -- About
nine a-clock we were escorted to the house of a certain justice not many miles
distant from Covent Garden; who no sooner saw the constable enter with a train
of prisoners at his heels, than he saluted him as follows: "So, Mr. Constable,
you are a diligent man -- what den of rogues have you been scouring?" Then
looking at us, who appeared with a dejected air, he continued, "Ay, ay,
thieves, I see -- old offenders -- O your humble servant, Mrs. Harridan! I
suppose these fellows have been taken robbing your house -- yes, yes, here is an
old acquaintance of mine -- you have used expedition (said he to me) in
returning from transportation; but we shall save you that trouble for the
future -- the surgeons will fetch you from your next transportation at their
expense." I assured his worship he was mistaken in me, for he had never seen me
in his life before. -- To this he replied, "How, you impudent rascal, dare you
say so to my face? Do you think I am to be imposed upon by that northern accent
which you have assumed? but it shall not avail you -- you shall find me too far
north for you. -- Here, clerk, write this fellow's mittimus -- His name is
Patrick Gaghagan." -- Here Mr. Jackson interposed, and told him, I was a
Scotchman lately come to town, descended of a good family, and that my name was
Random. -- The justice looked upon this declaration as an outrage against his
memory, on which he valued himself much; and strutting up to Jackson, with a
fierce countenance, put his hands in his sides, and said, "Who are you, Sir? --
Do you give me the lie? -- Take notice, gentlemen, here is a fellow who affronts
me upon the bench -- but I Will lay you fast, sirrah, I will -- for
notwithstanding your laced jacket, I believe you are a notorious felon." -- My
friend was so much abashed at this menace, which was thundered out with great
vociferation, that he changed color, and remained speechless -- This his
worship took for a symptom of guilt, and to complete the discovery continued
his threats. -- "Now, I am convinced you are a thief, -- your face discovers it
-- you tremble all over -- your conscience will not lie still -- you will be
hanged, sirrah (raising his voice) you will be hanged, and happy had it been
for the world, as well as your own miserable soul, if you had been detected and
cut off in the beginning of your career. -- Come hither, clerk, and take this
man's confession." -- I was in an agony of consternation, when the constable
going into another room with his worship, acquainted him with the truth of the
story: upon which he returned with a smiling countenance, and addressing
himself to us all, said, it was always his way to terrify young people, when
they came before him, that his threats might make a strong impression on their
minds, and deterr them from engaging in scenes of riot and debauchery which
commonly ended before the judge. -- Thus having cloaked his own want of
discernment, under the disguise of paternal care, we were dismissed, and I
found myself as much lightened as if a mountain had been lifted from off my
breast.

CHAP. XVIII.
I carry my qualifications to the navy-office -- the nature of it -- the
behavior of the s -- t -- y -- Strap's concern for my absence -- a battle
betwixt him and a blacksmith -- the troublesome consequences of it -- his
harrangue to me -- his friend the schoolmaster recommends me to a French
apothecary, who entertains me as a journeyman.
