
New Characters

The dancing was not yet begun, but the company was met, and the sprightly 
violins were employed to quicken their motions, when the Cleves party entered 
the ball room. They were distinguished immediately by a large party of 
officers, who assured Lionel, with whom they were acquainted, that they had 
impatiently been expected.

'I shall recompense you for waiting,' answered he, in a whisper, 'by 
introducing you to the rich heiress of Cleves, who now makes her first 
appearance from the nursery; though no! upon farther thoughts, I will only tell 
you she is one of our set, and leave it to your own ingenuity to find her out.'

While this was passing, Indiana, fluttering with all the secret triumph of 
conscious beauty, attended by Edgar, and guarded by Miss Margland, walked up 
the room, through a crowd of admiring spectators; in whom a new figure, without 
half her loveliness, would have excited the same curiosity, that her extreme 
inexperience attributed solely to her peculiar charms. Camilla and Eugenia 
followed rather as if in her train, than of her party; but Lionel kept entirely 
with the officers, insisting upon their guessing which was the heiress; to 
whom, while he purposely misled their conjectures, he urged them to make their 
court, by enumerating the present possessions of Sir Hugh, and her future 
expectations.

Camilla, however, passed not long unnoticed, though the splendor of Indiana's 
appearance cast her at first on the back ground; a circumstance which, by 
impressing her with a sensation of inferiority, divested her mind of all 
personal considerations, and gave to her air and countenance a graceful 
simplicity, a disengaged openness, and a guileless freedom from affectation, 
that rendered her, to the observant eye, as captivating upon examination, as 
Indiana, from the first glance, was brilliant and alluring. And thus, as they 
patrolled the room, Indiana excited an unmixt admiration, Camilla awakened an 
endless variety of remark; while each being seen for the first time, and every 
one else of the company for at least the second, all attention was their own, 
whether for criticism or for praise. To Indiana this answered, in fulfilling 
her expectations; by Camilla, it was unheeded, for, not awaiting, she did not 
perceive it; yet both felt equal satisfaction. The eyes of Camilla sparkled 
with delight as she surveyed all around her the gay novelty of the scene; the 
heart of Indiana beat with a pleasure wholly new, as she discovered that all 
surrounding her regarded her as the principal object.

Eugenia, meanwhile, had not even the negative felicity to pass unobserved; 
impertinent witticisms upon her face, person, and walk, though not uttered so 
audibly as to be distinctly heard, ran round the room in a confused murmur, and 
produced a disposition for sneering in the satirical, and for tittering in the 
giddy, that made her as valuable an acquisition to the company at large, who 
collect for any amusement, indifferent to its nature, as her fair cousin proved 
to the admirers of beauty, and her sister to the developers of expression. She 
was shielded, however, herself, from all undeserved mortifications, by not 
suspecting any were meant for her, and by a mind delightedly pre-occupied with 
that sudden expansion of ideas, with which new scenery and new objects charm a 
youthful imagination.

When they had taken two or three turns up and down the room, the saunterers 
were called upon to give place to the dancers. Edgar then led out Indiana, and 
the master of the ceremonies brought Major Cerwood to Camilla.

Eugenia, wholly left out, became the exclusive charge of Miss Margland; she 
felt no resentment of neglect, for she had formed no species of expectation. 
She looked on with perfect contentment, and the motley and quick changing group 
afforded her ample entertainment.

Miss Margland was not so passive; she seized the opportunity of inveighing very 
angrily against the mismanagement of Sir Hugh: 'If you had all,' she cried, 
'been taken to town, and properly brought out, according to my advice, such a 
disgrace as this could never have happened; everybody would have known who you 
were, and then, there is no doubt, you might have had partners enough; however, 
I heartily hope you won't be asked to dance all the evening, that he may be 
convinced who was in the right; besides, the more you are tired, the more you 
may see, against another time, Miss Eugenia, that it is better to listen a 
little to people's opinions, when they speak only for your own advantage, than 
to go on with just the same indifference, as if you had no proper person to 
consult with.'

Eugenia was too well amused to heed this remonstrance; and long accustomed to 
hear the voice of Miss Margland without profit or pleasure, her ear received 
its sound, but her attention included not its purpose.

Indiana and Camilla, in this public essay, acquitted themselves with all the 
merits, and all the faults common to a first exhibition. The spectators upon 
such occasions, though never equally observant, are never afterwards so 
lenient. Whatever fails is attributed to modesty, more winning than the utmost 
success of excellence. Timidity solicits that mercy which pride is most 
gratified to grant; the blushes of juvenile shame atone for the deficiencies 
which cause them; and awkwardness itself, in the unfounded terrors of youth, is 
perhaps more interesting than grace.

Indiana could with difficulty keep to the figure of the dance, from the 
exulting, yet unpractised certainty of attracting all eyes; and Camilla 
perpetually turned wrong, from the mere flutter of fear, which made her expect 
she should never turn right. Major Cerwood, her partner, with a view to 
encourage her, was profuse in his compliments; but, as new to what she heard as 
what she performed, she was only the more confused by the double claim to her 
attention.

Edgar, meanwhile, was most assiduous to aid his fair partner. Miss Margland, 
though scarcely even superficial in general knowledge, was conversant in the 
practical detail of the hackneyed mode of forming matrimonial engagements; she 
judged, therefore, rightly, that her pupil would be seen to most advantage, in 
the distinction of that adulation by which new beholders would stamp new value 
on her charms. From the time of his first boyish gallantry, on the ill-fated 
birth-day of Camilla, Indiana had never so much struck young Mandlebert, as 
while he attended her up the assembly-room. Miss Margland observed this with 
triumph, and prophesied the speediest conclusion to her long and weary sojourn 
at Cleves, in the much wished-for journey to London, with a bride ready made, 
and an establishment ready formed.

When the two first dances were over, the gentlemen were desired to change 
partners. Major Cerwood asked the hand of Indiana, and Edgar repaired to 
Camilla: 'Do you bear malice?' he cried, with a smile, 'or may I now make the 
claim that Sir Hugh relinquished for me?'

'O yes,' answered she, with alacrity, when informed of the plan of change; 'and 
I wish there was any body else, that would dance with me afterwards, instead of 
that Major.'

'I dare believe,' said he, laughing 'there are many bodies else, who would 
oblige you, if your declaration were heard. But what has the Major done to you? 
Has he admired you without knowing how to keep is own counsel?'

'No, no; only he has treated me like a country simpleton, and made me as many 
fine speeches, as if he had been talking to Indiana.'

'You think, then, Indiana would have swallowed flattery with less difficulty?'

'No, indeed! but I think the same things said to her would no longer have been 
so extravagant.'

Edgar, to whom the sun-beams of the mind gave a glow which not all the 
sparkling rays of the brightest eyes could emit, respected her modesty too 
highly to combat it, and, dropping the subject, enquired what was become of 
Eugenia.

'O poor Eugenia!' cried she, 'I see nothing of her, and I am very much afraid 
she has had no better partner all this time than Miss Margland.'

Edgar, turning round, presently discerned her; she was still looking on, with 
an air of the most perfect composure, examining the various parties, totally 
without suspicion of the examination she was herself sustaining; while Miss 
Margland was vainly pouring in her ears observations, or exhortations, 
evidently of a complaining nature.

'There is something truly respectable,' said Edgar, 'in the innate philosophy 
with which she bears such neglect.'

'Yet I wish it were put less to the proof;' said Camilla. 'I would give the 
world somebody would take her out!'

'You don't think she would dance?'

'O yes she would! her lameness is no impediment; for she never thinks of it. We 
all learnt together at Cleves. Dancing gives her a little more exertion, and 
therefore a little more fatigue than other people, but that is all.'

'After these two dances thenâ€”'

'Will you be her partner?' interrupted Camilla, 'O go to her at once! 
immediately! and you will give me twenty times more pleasure than I can have in 
dancing myself.'

She then flew to a form, and eagerly seated herself where she perceived the 
first vacancy, to stop any debate, and enforce his consent.

The dance, which had been delayed by a dispute about the tune, was now 
beginning. Edgar, looking after her with affected reproach, but real 
admiration, asked the hand of Eugenia; who gave it with readiness and pleasure; 
for, though contented as a spectatress, she experienced an agreeable surprise 
in becoming a party engaged.

Camilla, happy in her own good humour, now looked at her neighbours; one of 
which was an elderly lady, who, wholly employed in examining and admiring the 
performance of her own daughters, saw nothing else in the room. The other was a 
gentleman, much distinguished by his figure and appearance, and dressed so 
completely in the extreme of fashion, as more than to border upon foppery. The 
ease and negligence of his air denoted a self-settled superiority to all about 
him; yet, from time to time, there was an archness in the glance of his eye, 
that promised, under a deep and wilful veil of conceit and affectation, a 
secret disposition to deride the very follies he was practising. He was now 
lounging against the wainscoat; with one hand on his side, and the other upon 
his eye-lids, occupying the space, without using the seat, to the left of 
Camilla.

Miss Margland, perceiving what she regarded as a fair vacancy, made up to the 
spot, and saying, 'Sir, by your leave,' was preparing to take possession of the 
place, when the gentleman, as if without seeing her, dropt suddenly into it 
himself, and, pouring a profusion of eau suave upon his handkerchief, 
exclaimed: 'What a vastly bad room this is for dancing!'

Camilla, concluding herself addressed, turned round to him; but, seeing he was 
sniffing up the eau suave, without looking at her, imagined he meant to speak 
to Miss Margland.

Miss Margland was of the same opinion, and, with some pique at his seizing thus 
her intended seat, rather sharply answered: 'Yes, sir, and it's a vast bad room 
for not dancing; for if every body would dance that ought, there would be 
accommodation sufficient for other people.'

'Incomparably well observed!' cried he, collecting some bonbons from a 
bonboniere, and swallowing one after another with great rapidity: 'But won't 
you sit down? You must be enormously tired. Let me supplicate you to sit down.'

Miss Margland, supposing he meant to make amends for his inattention, by 
delivering up the place, civilly thanked him, and said she should not be sorry, 
for she had stood a good while.

'Have you, indeed?' cried he, sprinkling some jessamine drops upon his hands; 
'how horribly abominable? Why don't some of those Mercuries, those Ganymedes, 
those waiters, I believe you call them, get you a chair?'

Miss Margland, excessively affronted, turned her back to him; and Camilla made 
an offer of her own seat; but, as she had been dancing, and would probably 
dance again, Miss Margland would not let her rise.

'Shall I call to one of those Barbarians, those Goths, those Vandals?' cried 
the same gentleman, who now was spirting lavender water all about him, with 
grimaces that proclaimed forcibly his opinion of the want of perfume in the 
room: 'Do pray let me harangue them a little for you upon their inordinate want 
of sensibility.'

Miss Margland deigned not any answer; but of that he took no notice, and 
presently called out, though without raising his voice, 'Here, Mr. Waiter! 
Purveyor, Surveyor, or whatsoever other title "please thine ear," art thou 
deaf? why dost not bring this lady a chair? Those people are most amazing hard 
of hearing! Shall I call again? Waiter, I say!' still speaking rather lower 
than louder; 'Don't I stun you by this shocking vociferation?'

'Sir, you're vastlyâ€”obliging!' cried Miss Margland, unable longer to hold 
silence, yet with a look and manner that would much better have accorded with 
vastlyâ€”impertinent.

She then pursued a waiter herself, and procured a chair.

Casting his eyes next upon Camilla, he examined her with much attention. 
Abashed, she turned away her head; but not choosing to lose his object, he 
called it back again, by familiarly saying, 'How is Sir Hugh?'

A good deal surprised, she exclaimed, 'Do you know my uncle, sir?'

'Not in the least, ma'am,' he coolly answered.

Camilla, much wondering, was then forced into conversation with Miss Margland: 
but, without paying any regard to her surprise, he presently said, 'It's most 
extremely worth your while to take a glance at that inimitably good figure. Is 
it not exquisite? Can you suppose any thing beyond it?'

Camilla, looking at the person to whom he pointed, and who was sufficiently 
ludicrous, from an air of vulgar solemnity, and a dress stiffly new, though 
completely old-fashioned, felt disposed to join in his laugh, had she not been 
disconcerted by the mingled liberty and oddity of his attack.

'Sir,' said Miss Margland, winking at her to be silent, though eager to answer 
in her stead, 'the mixt company one always meets at these public balls, makes 
them very unfit for ladies of fashion, for there's no knowing who one may 
either dance with or speak to.'

'Vastly true, ma'am,' cried he, superciliously dropping his eyes, not to look 
at her.

Miss Margland, perceiving this, bridled resentfully, and again talked on with 
Camilla; till another exclamation interrupted them. 'O pray,' cried he, 'I do 
entreat you look at that group! Is it not past compare? If ever you held a 
pencil in your life, I beg and beseech you to take a memorandum of that tall 
may-pole. Have you ever seen any thing so excessively delectable?'

Camilla could not forbear smiling; but Miss Margland, taking all reply upon 
herself, said: 'Caricatures, sir, are by no means pleasing for young ladies to 
be taking, at their first coming out: one does not know who may be next, if 
once they get into that habit!'

'Immeasurably well spoken, ma'am,' returned he; and, rising with a look of 
disgust, he sauntered to another part of the room.

Miss Margland, extremely provoked, said she was sure he was some Irish 
fortune-hunter, dressed out in all he was worth; and charged Camilla to take no 
manner of notice of him.

When the two second dances were over, Edgar, conducting Eugenia to Miss 
Margland, said to Camilla: 'Now, at least, if there is not a spell against it, 
will you dance with me?'

'And if there is one, too,' cried she, gaily; 'for I am perfectly disposed to 
help breaking it.'

She rose, and they were again going to take their places, when Miss Margland, 
reproachfully calling after Edgar, demanded what he had done with Miss Lynmere?

At the same moment, led by Major Cerwood, who was paying her in full all the 
arrears of that gallantry Miss Margland had taught her to regret hitherto 
missing, Indiana joined them; the Major, in making his bow, lamenting the rules 
of the assembly, that compelled him to relinquish her hand.

'Mr. Mandlebert,' said Miss Margland, 'you see Miss Lynmere is again 
disengaged.'

'Yes, ma'am,' answered Edgar, drawing Camilla away; 'and every gentleman in the 
room will be happy to see it too.'

'Stop, Miss Camilla!' cried Miss Margland; 'I thought, Mr. Mandlebert, Sir Hugh 
had put Miss Lynmere under your protection?'

'O it does not signify!' said Indiana, colouring high with a new raised sense 
of importance; 'I don't at all doubt but one or other of the officers will take 
care of me.'

Edgar, though somewhat disconcerted, would still have proceeded; but Camilla, 
alarmed by the frowns of Miss Margland, begged him to lead out her cousin, and, 
promising to be in readiness for the next two dances, glided back to her seat. 
He upbraided her in vain; Miss Margland looked pleased, and Indiana was so much 
piqued, that he found it necessary to direct all his attention to appeasing 
her, as he led her to join the dance.

A gentleman now, eminently distinguished by personal beauty, approached the 
ladies that remained, and, in the most respectful manner, began conversing with 
Miss Margland; who received his attentions so gratefully, that, when he told 
her he only waited to see the master of the ceremonies at leisure, in order to 
have the honour of begging the hand of one of her young ladies, his civilities 
so conquered all her pride of etiquette, that she assured him there was no sort 
of occasion for such a formality, with a person of his appearance and manners; 
and was bidding Camilla rise, who was innocently preparing to obey, when, to 
the surprise of them all, he addressed himself to Eugenia.

'There!' cried Miss Margland, exultingly, when they were gone; 'that gentleman 
is completely a gentleman. I saw it from the beginning. How different to that 
impertinent fop that spoke to us just now! He has the politeness to take out 
Miss Eugenia, because he sees plainly nobody else will think of it, except just 
Mr. Mandlebert, or some such old acquaintance.'

Major Cerwood was now advancing towards Camilla, with that species of smiling 
and bowing manner, which is the usual precursor of an invitation to a fair 
partner; when the gentleman whom Miss Margland had just called an impertinent 
fop, with a sudden swing, not to be eluded, cast himself between the Major and 
Camilla, as if he had not observed his approach; and spoke to her in a voice so 
low, that, though she concluded he asked her to dance, she could not distinctly 
hear a word he said.

A good deal confused, she looked at him for an explanation; while the Major, 
from her air of attention, supposing himself too late, retreated.

Her new beau then, carelessly seating himself by her side, indolently said: 
'What a heat! I have not the most distant idea how you can bear it!'

Camilla found it impossible to keep her countenance at such a result of a 
whisper, though she complied with the injunctions of Miss Margland, in avoiding 
mutual discourse with a stranger of so showy an appearance.

'Yet they are dancing on,' he continued, 'just as if the Greenland snows were 
inviting their exercise! I should really like to find out what those people are 
made of. Can you possibly imagine their composition?'

Heedless of receiving no answer, he soon after added: 'I am vastly glad you 
don't like dancing.'

'Me?' cried Camilla, surprised out of her caution.

'Yes; you hold it in antipathy, don't you?'

'No, indeed! far from it.'

'Don't you really?' cried he, starting back; 'that's amazingly extraordinary! 
surprising in the extreme! Will you have the goodness to tell me what you like 
in it?'

'Sir,' interfered Miss Margland, 'there's nothing but what's very natural in a 
young lady's taking pleasure in an elegant accomplishment; provided she is 
secure from any improper partner, or company.'

'Irrefragably just, ma'am!' answered he; affecting to take a pinch of snuff, 
and turning his head another way.

Here Lionel, hastily running up to Camilla, whispered, 'I have made a fine 
confusion among the red-coats about the heiress of Cleves! I have put them all 
upon different scents.'

He was then going back, when a faint laugh from the neighbour of Camilla 
detained him; 'Look, I adjure you,' cried he, addressing her, 'if there's not 
that delightful creature again, with his bran-new clothes? and they sit upon 
him so tight, he can't turn round his vastly droll figure, except like a puppet 
with one jerk for the whole body. He is really an immense treat: I should like 
of all things in nature, to know who he can be.'

A waiter then passing with a glass of water for a lady, he stopt him in his 
way, exclaiming: 'Pray, my extremely good friend, can you tell me who that 
agreeable person is, that stands there, with the air of a poker?'

'Yes, sir,' answered the man; 'I know him very well. His name is Dubster. He's 
quite a gentleman to my knowledge, and has very good fortunes.'

'Camilla,' cried Lionel, 'will you have him for a partner?' And, immediately 
hastening up to him, he said two or three words in a low voice, and skipped 
back to the dance.

Mr. Dubster then walked up to her, and, with an air conspicuously aukward, 
solemnly said, 'So you want to dance, ma'am?'

Convinced he had been sent to her by Lionel, but by no means chusing to display 
herself with a figure distinguished only as a mark for ridicule; she looked 
down to conceal her ever-ready smiles, and said she had been dancing some time.

'But if you like to dance again, ma'am,' said he, 'I am very ready to oblige 
you.'

She now saw that this offer had been requested as a favour; and, while half 
provoked, half diverted, grew embarrassed how to get rid of him, without 
involving a necessity to refuse afterwards Edgar, and every other; for Miss 
Margland had informed her of the general rules upon these occasions. She 
looked, therefore, at that lady for counsel; while her neighbour, sticking his 
hands in his sides, surveyed him from head to foot, with an expression of such 
undisguised amusement, that Mr. Dubster, who could not help observing it, cast 
towards him, from time to time, a look of the most angry surprise.

Miss Margland approving, as well understanding the appeal, now authoritatively 
interfered, saying: 'Sir, I suppose you know the etiquette in public places?'

'The what, ma'am?' cried he, staring.

'You know, I suppose, sir, that no young lady of any consideration dances with 
a gentleman that is a stranger to her, without he's brought to her by the 
master of the ceremonies?'

'O as to that, ma'am, I have no objection. I'll go see for him, if you've a 
mind. It makes no difference to me.'

And away he went.

'So you really intend dancing with him?' cried Camilla's neighbour. ''Twill be 
a vastly good sight. I have not the most remote conception how he will bear the 
pulling and jostling about. Bend he cannot; but I am immensely afraid he will 
break. I would give fifty guineas for his portrait. He is indubitably put 
together without joints.'

Mr. Dubster now returned, and, with a look of some disturbance, said to Miss 
Margland: 'Ma'am, I don't know which is the master of the ceremonies. I can't 
find him out; for I don't know as ever I see him.'

'O pray,' cried Camilla eagerly, 'do not take the trouble of looking for him; 
'twill answer no purpose.'

'Why I think so too, ma'am,' said he, misunderstanding her; 'for as I don't 
know the gentleman myself, he could go no great way towards making us better 
acquainted with one another: so we may just as well take our skip at once.'

Camilla now looked extremely foolish; and Miss Margland was again preparing an 
obstacle, when Mr. Dubster started one himself. 'The worst is,' cried he, 'I 
have lost one of my gloves, and I am sure I had two when I came. I suppose I 
may have dropt it in the other room. If you shan't mind it, I'll dance without 
it; for I don't mind those things myself of a straw.'

'O! sir,' cried Miss Margland, 'that's such a thing as never was heard of. I 
can't possibly consent to let Miss Camilla dance in such a manner as that.'

'Why then, if you like it better, ma'am, I'll go back and look for it.'

Again Camilla would have declined giving him any trouble; but he seemed 
persuaded it was only from shyness, and would not listen. 'Though the worst 
is,' he said, 'you're losing so much time. However, I'll give a good hunt; 
unless, indeed, that gentleman, who is doing nothing himself, except looking on 
at us all, would be kind enough to lend me his.'

'I rather fancy, sir,' cried the gentleman, immediately recovering from a 
laughing fit, and surveying the requester with supercilious contempt; 'I rather 
suspect they would not perfectly fit you.'

'Why then,' cried he, 'I think I'll go and ask Tom Hicks to lend me a pair; for 
it's a pity to let the young lady lose her dance for such a small trifle as 
that.'

Camilla began remonstrating; but he tranquilly walked away.

'You are superlatively in the good graces of fortune to-night,' cried her new 
friend, 'superlatively to a degree: you may not meet with such an invaluably 
uncommon object in twenty lustres.'

'Certainly,' said Miss Margland, 'there's a great want of regulation at balls, 
to prevent low people from asking who they will to dance with them. It's bad 
enough one can't keep people one knows nothing of from speaking to one.'

'Admirably hit off! admirable in the extreme!' he answered; suddenly twisting 
himself round, and beginning a whispering conversation with a gentleman on his 
other side.

Mr. Dubster soon came again, saying, somewhat dolorously, 'I have looked high 
and low for my glove, but I am no nearer. I dare say somebody has picked it up, 
out of a joke, and put it in their pocket. And as to Tom Hicks, where he can be 
hid, I can't tell, unless he has hanged himself; for I can't find him no more 
than my glove. However, I've got a boy to go and get me a pair; if all the 
shops a'n't shut up.'

Camilla, fearing to be involved in a necessity of dancing with him, expressed 
herself very sorry for this step; but, again misconceiving her motive, he 
begged her not to mind it; saying, 'A pair of gloves here or there is no great 
matter. All I am concerned for is, putting you off so long from having a little 
pleasure, for I dare say the boy won't come till the next two batches; so if 
that gentleman that looks so particular at me, has a mind to jig it with you a 
bit himself, in the interim, I won't be his hindrance.'

Receiving no answer, he bent his head lower down, and said, in a louder voice, 
'Pray, sir, did you hear me?'

'Sir, you are ineffably good!' was the reply; without a look, or any further 
notice.

Much affronted, he said no more, but stood pouting and stiff before Camilla, 
till the second dance was over, and another general separation of partners took 
place. 'I thought how it would be, ma'am,' he then cried; 'for I know it's no 
such easy matter to find shops open at this time of night; for if people's 
'prentices can't take a little pleasure by now, they can't never.'

Tea being at this time ordered, the whole party collected to remove to the next 
room. Lionel, seeing Mr. Dubster standing by Camilla, with a rapturous laugh, 
cried, 'Well, sister, have you been dancing?'

Camilla, though laughing too, reproachfully shook her head at him; while Mr. 
Dubster gravely said, 'It's no fault of mine, sir, that the lady's sitting 
still; for I come and offered myself to her the moment you told me she wanted a 
partner; but I happened of the misfortune of losing one of my gloves, and not 
being able to find Tom Hicks, I've been waiting all this while for a boy as has 
promised to get me a pair; though, I suppose he's fell down in the dark and 
broke his skull, by his not coming. And, indeed, if that elderly lady had not 
been so particular, I might as well have done without; for, if I had one on, 
nobody would have been the wiser but that t'other might have been in my pocket.'

This speech, spoken without any ceremony in the hearing of Miss Margland, to 
the visible and undisguised delight of Lionel, so much enraged her, that, 
hastily calling him aside, she peremptorily demanded how he came to bring such 
a vulgar partner to his sister?

'Because you took no care to get her a better,' he answered, heedlessly.

Camilla also began to remonstrate; but, without hearing her, he courteously 
addressed himself to Mr. Dubster, and told him he was sure Miss Margland and 
his sister would expect the pleasure of his company to join their party at tea.

Miss Margland frowned in vain; Mr. Dubster bowed, as at a compliment but his 
due; observing he should then be close at hand for his partner; and they were 
proceeding to the tea-room, when the finer new acquaintance of Camilla called 
after Mr. Dubster: 'Pray, my good sir, who may this Signor Thomaso be, that has 
the honour to stand so high in your good graces?'

'Mine, sir?' cried Mr. Dubster; 'I know no Signor Thomaso, nor Signor nothing 
else neither: so I don't know what you mean.'

'Did not I hear you dilating, my very good sir, upon a certain Mr. Tom 
somebody?'

'What, I suppose then, sir, if the truth be known, you would say Tom Hicks?'

'Very probably, sir: though I am not of the first accuracy as the gentleman's 
nomenclator.'

'What? don't you know him, sir? why he's the head waiter!'

Then, following the rest of the party, he was placed, by the assistance of 
Lionel, next to Camilla, in utter defiance of all the angry glances of Miss 
Margland, who herself invited the handsome partner of Eugenia to join their 
group, and reaped some consolation in his willing civilities; till the 
attention of the whole assembly was called, or rather commanded by a new object.

A lady, not young, but still handsome, with an air of fashion easy almost to 
insolence, with a complete but becoming undress, with a work-bag hanging on her 
arm, whence she was carelessly knotting, entered the ball-room alone, and, 
walking straight through it to the large folding glass doors of the tea-room, 
there stopt, and took a general survey of the company, with a look that 
announced a decided superiority to all she saw, and a perfect indifference to 
what opinion she incurred in return.

She was immediately joined by all the officers, and several other gentlemen, 
whose eagerness to shew themselves of her acquaintance marked her for a woman 
of some consequence; though she took little other notice of them, than that of 
giving to each some frivolous commission; telling one to hold her work-bag; 
bidding another fetch her a chair; a third, ask for a glass of water; and a 
fourth, take care of her cloak. She then planted herself just without the 
folding-doors, declaring there could be no breathing in the smaller apartment, 
and sent about the gentlemen for various refreshments; all which she rejected 
when they arrived, with extreme contempt, and a thousand fantastic grimaces.

The tea-table at which Miss Margland presided being nearest to these 
folding-doors, she and her party heard, from time to time, most of what was 
said, especially by the newly arrived lady; who, though she now and then spoke 
for several minutes in a laughing whisper, to some one she called to her side, 
uttered most of her remarks, and all her commands quite aloud, with that sort 
of deliberate ease which belongs to the most determined negligence of who 
heard, or who escaped hearing her, who were pleased, or who were offended.

Camilla and Eugenia were soon wholly engrossed by this new personage; and 
Lionel, seeing her surrounded by the most fashionable men of the assembly, 
forgot Mr. Dubster and his gloves, in an eagerness to be introduced to her.

Colonel Andover, to whom he applied, willingly gratified him: 'Give me leave, 
Mrs. Arlbery,' cried he, to the lady, who was then conversing with General 
Kinsale, 'to present to you Mr. Tyrold.'

'For Heaven's sake don't speak to me just now,' cried she; 'the General is 
telling me the most interesting thing in the world. Go on, dear General!'

Lionel, who, if guided by his own natural judgment, would have conceived this 
to be the height of ill-breeding or of ignorance, no sooner saw Colonel Andover 
bow in smiling submission to her orders, than he concluded himself all in the 
dark with respect to the last licences of fashion: and, while contentedly he 
waited her leisure for his reception, he ran over in his own mind the triumph 
with which he should carry to Oxford the newest flourish of the bon ton.

In a few minutes, after gaily laughing with the General, she turned suddenly to 
Colonel Andover, and, striking him on the arm with her fan, exclaimed: 'Well, 
now, Colonel, what is it you would say?'

'Mr. Tyrold,' he answered, 'is very ambitious of the honour of being introduced 
to you.'

'With all my heart. Which is he?' And then, nodding to Lionel's bow, 'You live, 
I think,' she added, 'in this neighbourhood? By the way, Colonel, how came you 
never to bring Mr. Tyrold to me before? Mr. Tyrold, I flatter myself you intend 
to take this very ill.'

Lionel was beginning to express his sense of the loss he had suffered by the 
delay, when, again, patting the Colonel, 'Only look, I beg you,' she cried, 'at 
that insupportable Sir Sedley Clarendel! how he sits at his ease there! amusing 
his ridiculous fancy with every creature he sees. Yet what an elegant posture 
the animal has found out! I make no doubt he would as soon forfeit his estate 
as give up that attitude. I must make him come to me immediately for that very 
reason;â€”do go to him, good Andover, and say I want him directly.'

The Colonel obeyed; but not so the gentleman he addressed, who was the new 
acquaintance of Camilla. He only bowed to the message, and, kissing his hand 
across the room to the lady, desired the Colonel to tell her he was ineffably 
tired; but would incontestably have the honour to throw himself at her feet the 
next morning.

'O, intolerable!' cried she, 'he grows more conceited every hour. Yet what an 
agreeable wretch it is! There's nothing like him. I cannot possibly do without 
him. Andover, tell him if he does not come this moment he kills me.'

'And is that a message,' said General Kinsale, 'to cure him of being conceited?'

'O, Heaven forbid, my good General, I should cure him! That would utterly spoil 
him. His conceit is precisely what enchants me. Rob him of that, and you lose 
all hold of him.'

'Is it then necessary to keep him a fop, in order to retain him in your chains?'

'O, he is not in my chains, I promise you. A fop, my dear General, wears no 
chains but his own. However, I like to have him, because he is so hard to be 
got; and I am fond of conversing with him, because he is so ridiculous. Fetch 
him, therefore, Colonel, without delay.'

This second embassy prevailed; he shrugged his shoulders, but arose to follow 
the Colonel.

'See, madam, your victory!' said the General. 'What would not a military man 
give for such talents of command?'

'Ay, but look with what magnificent tardiness he obeys orders! There is 
something quite irresistible in his impertinence; 'tis so conscious and so 
piquant. I think, General, 'tis a little like my own.'

Sir Sedley now advancing, seized the back of a chair, which he twirled round 
for a resting place to his elbow, and exclaimed, 'You know yourself 
invincible!' with an air that shewed him languidly prepared for her reproaches: 
but, to his own surprise, and that of all around him, she only, with a smile 
and a nod, cried, 'How do do?' and immediately turning wholly away from him, 
addressed herself to Colonel Andover, desiring him to give her the history of 
who was in the tea-room.

At this time a young Ensign, who had been engaged at a late dinner in the 
neighbourhood, stroamed into the ballroom, with the most visible marks of his 
unfitness for appearing in it; and, in total ignorance of his own condition, 
went up to Colonel Andover, and, clapping him upon the back, called out, with a 
loud oath, 'Colonel, I hope you have taken care to secure to me the prettiest 
little young angel in the room? You know with what sincerity I despise an old 
hag.'

The Colonel, with some concern, advised him to retire; but, insensible to his 
counsel, he uttered oath upon oath, and added, 'I'm not to be played upon, 
Colonel. Beauty in a pretty girl is as necessary an ingredient, as honour in a 
brave soldier; and I could find in my heart to sink down to the bottom of the 
Channel every fellow without one, and every dear creature without the other.'

Then, in defiance of all remonstrance, he staggered into the tea-room; and, 
after a short survey, stopt opposite to Indiana, and, swearing aloud she was 
the handsomest angel he had ever beheld, begged her hand without further 
ceremony; assuring her he had broken up the best party that had yet been made 
for him in the county, merely for the joy of dancing with her.

Indiana, to whom not the smallest doubt of the truth of this assertion 
occurred; and who, not suspecting he was intoxicated, thought his manner the 
most spirited and gallant she had ever seen, was readily accepting his offer; 
when Edgar, who saw her danger, started up, and exclaimed: 'This lady, sir, is 
engaged to dance the next two dances with me.'

'The lady did not tell me so, sir!' cried the Ensign, firing.

'Miss Lynmere,' replied Edgar, coolly, 'will pardon me, that on this occasion, 
my memory has an interest to be better than her's. I believe it is time for us 
to take our places.'

He then whispered a brief excuse to Camilla, and hurried Indiana to the 
ballroom.

The Ensign, who knew not that she had danced with him the last time, was 
obliged to submit; while Indiana, not conjecturing the motive that now impelled 
Edgar, was in a yet brighter blaze of beauty, from an exhilarating notion that 
there was a contest for the honour of her hand.

Camilla, once more disappointed of Edgar, had now no resource against Mr. 
Dubster, but the non-arrival of the gloves; for he had talked so publicly of 
waiting for them to dance with her, that every one regarded her as engaged.

No new proposition being made for Eugenia, Miss Margland permitted her again to 
be led out by the handsome stranger.

When she was gone, Mr. Dubster, who kept constantly close to Camilla, said: 
'They tell me, ma'am, that ugly little body's a great fortune.'

Camilla very innocently asked who he meant.

'Why that little lame thing, that was here drinking tea with you. Tom Hicks 
says she'll have a power of money.'

Camilla, whose sister was deservedly dear to her, looked much displeased; but 
Mr. Dubster, not perceiving it, continued: 'He recommended it to me to dance 
with her myself, from the first, upon that account. But I says to him, says I, 
I had no notion that a person, who had such a hobble in their gait, would think 
of such a thing as going to dancing. But there I was out, for as to the women, 
asking your pardon, ma'am, there's nothing will put 'em off from their 
pleasure. But, however, for my part, I had no thought of dancing at all, if it 
had not been for that young gentleman's asking me; for I'm not over fond of 
such jiggets, as they've no great use in 'em; only I happened to be this way, 
upon a little matter of business, so I thought I might as well come and see the 
hop, as Tom Hicks could contrive to get me a ticket.'

This was the sort of discourse with which Camilla was regaled till the two 
dances were over; and then, begging her to sit still till he came back, he 
quitted her, to see what he could do about his gloves.

Edgar, when he returned with Indiana, addressed himself privately to Miss 
Margland, whom he advised to take the young ladies immediately home; as it 
would not be possible for him, a second time, to break through the rules of the 
assembly, and Indiana must, therefore, inevitably accept the young Ensign, who 
already was following and claiming her, and whose condition was obviously 
improper for the society of ladies.

Miss Margland, extremely pleased with him, for thus protecting her pupil, 
instantly agreed; and, collecting her three young charges, hastened them down 
stairs; though the young Ensign, inflamed with angry disappointment, uttered 
the most bitter lamentations at their sudden departure; and though Mr. Dubster, 
pursuing them to the coach door, called out to Camilla, in a tone of pique and 
vexation, 'Why, what are you going for now, ma'am, when I have just got a new 
pair of gloves, that I have bought o' purpose?'
