
A Family Breakfast

In their way home, Edgar apologised to Camilla for again foregoing the promised 
pleasure of dancing with her, by explaining the situation of the Ensign.

Camilla, internally persuaded that any reason would suffice for such an 
arrangement, where Indiana was its object, scarce listened to an excuse which 
she considered as unnecessary.

Indiana was eager to view in the glass how her dress and ornaments had borne 
the shaking of the dance, and curiously impatient to look anew at a face and a 
figure of which no self-vanity, nor even the adulation of Miss Margland, had 
taught her a consciousness, such as she had acquired from the adventures of 
this night. She hastened, therefore, to her apartment as soon as she arrived at 
Cleves, and there indulged in an examination which forbade all surprise, and 
commanded equal justice for the admirers and the admired.

Miss Margland, anxious to make her own report to Sir Hugh, accompanied Camilla 
and Eugenia to his room, where he was still sitting up for them.

She expatiated upon the behaviour of young Mandlebert, in terms that filled the 
baronet with satisfaction. She exulted in the success of her own measures; and, 
sinking the circumstance of the intended impartiality of Edgar, enlarged upon 
his dancing, out of his turn, with Indiana, as at an event which manifested his 
serious designs beyond all possibility of mistake.

Sir Hugh, in the fulness of his content, promised that when the wedding day 
arrived, they should all have as fine new gowns as the bride herself.

The next morning, not considering that every one else would require unusual 
repose, he got up before his customary hour, from an involuntary hope of 
accelerating his favourite project; but he had long the breakfast parlour to 
himself, and became so fatigued and discomfited by fasting and waiting, that 
when Indiana, who appeared last, but for whom he insisted upon staying, entered 
the room, he said: 'My dear, I could really find a pleasure in giving you a 
little scold, if it were not for setting a bad example, which God forbid! And, 
indeed, it's not so much your fault as the ball's, to which I can never be a 
sincere friend, unless it be just to answer some particular purpose.'

Miss Margland defended her pupil, and called upon Mandlebert for assistance, 
which he readily gave. Sir Hugh then was not merely appeased but gratified, and 
declared, the next moment, with a marked smile at Indiana, that his breakfast 
[he] had not relished so well for a twelvemonth, owing to the advantage of not 
beginning till he had got an appetite.

Soon after, Lionel, galloping across the park, hastily dismounted, and 
scampered into the parlour.

The zealot for every species of sport, the candidate for every order of whim, 
was the light-hearted mirthful Lionel. A stranger to reflection, and incapable 
of care, laughter seemed not merely the bent of his humour, but the necessity 
of his existence: he pursued it at all seasons, he indulged it upon all 
occasions. With excellent natural parts, he trifled away all improvement; 
without any ill temper, he spared no one's feelings. Yet, though not radically 
vicious, nor deliberately malevolent, the egotism which urged him to make his 
own amusement his first pursuit, sacrificed his best friends and first duties, 
if they stood in its way.

'Come, my little girls, come!' cried he, as he entered the room; 'get your hats 
and cloaks as fast as possible; there is a public breakfast at Northwick, and 
you are all expected without delay.'

This sudden invitation occasioned a general commotion. Indiana gave an 
involuntary jump; Camilla and Eugenia looked delighted; and Miss Margland 
seemed ready to second the proposition; but Sir Hugh, with some surprise, 
exclaimed: 'A public breakfast, my dear boy! why where's the need of that, when 
we have got so good a private one?'

'O, let us go! let us go, uncle!' cried Indiana. 'Miss Margland, do pray speak 
to my uncle to let us go!'

'Indeed, sir,' said Miss Margland, 'it is time now, in all conscience, for the 
young ladies to see a little more of the world, and that it should be known who 
they are. I am sure they have been immured long enough, and I only wish you had 
been at the ball last night, sir, yourself!'

'Me, Mrs. Margland! Lord help me! what should I do at such a thing as that, 
with all this gout in my hip?'

'You would have seen, sir, the fine effects of keeping the young ladies out of 
society in this manner. Miss Camilla, if I had not prevented it, would have 
danced with I don't know who; and as to Miss Eugenia, she was as near as 
possible to not dancing at all, owing to nobody's knowing who she was.'

Sir Hugh had no time to reply to this attack, from the urgency of Indiana, and 
the impetuosity of Lionel, who, applying to Camilla, said: 'Come, child, ask my 
uncle yourself, and then we shall go at once.'

Camilla readily made it her own request.

'My dear,' answered Sir Hugh, 'I can't be so unnatural to deny you a little 
pleasure, knowing you to be such a merry little whirligig; not but what you'd 
enjoy yourself just as much at home, if they'd let you alone. However, as 
Indiana's head is so much turned upon it, for which I beg you won't think the 
worse of her, Mr. Mandlebert, it being no more than the common fault of a young 
person no older than her; why, you must all go, I think, provided you are not 
satisfied already, which, by the breakfast you have made, I should think likely 
enough to be the case.'

They then eagerly arose, and the females hastened to make some change in their 
dress. Sir Hugh, calling Eugenia back, said: 'As to you, my little classic, I 
make but small doubt you will be half ready to break your heart at missing your 
lesson, knowing hic, h√¶c, hoc, to be dearer to you, and for good reasons 
enough, too, in the end, than all the hopping and skipping in the world; so if 
you had rather stay away, don't mind all those dunces; for so I must needs call 
them, in comparison to you and Dr. Orkborne, though without the least meaning 
to undervalue them.'

Eugenia frankly acknowledged she had been much amused the preceding evening, 
and wished to be again of the party.

'Why then, if that's the case,' said the baronet, the best way will be for Dr. 
Orkborne to be your squire; by which means you may have a little study as you 
go along, to the end that the less time may be thrown away in doing nothing.'

Eugenia, who perceived no objection to this idea, assented, and went quietly up 
stairs, to prepare for setting out. Sir Hugh, by no means connecting the 
laughter of Lionel, nor the smile of Edgar, with his proposal, gravely repeated 
it to Dr. Orkborne, adding: 'And if you want a nice pair of gloves, Doctor, not 
that I make the offer in any detriment to your own, but I had six new pair come 
home just before my gout, which, I can assure you, have never seen the light 
since, and are as much at your service as if I had bespoke them on purpose.'

The mirth of Lionel grew now so outrageous, that Dr. Orkborne, much offended, 
walked out of the room without making any answer.

'There is something,' cried Sir Hugh, after a pause, 'in these men of learning, 
prodigious nice to deal with; however, not understanding them, in point of 
their maxims, it's likely enough I may have done something wrong; for he could 
not have seemed much more affronted, if I had told him I had six new pair of 
gloves lying by me, which he should be never the better for.'

When they were all ready, Sir Hugh calling to Edgar, said: 'Now as I don't much 
chuse to have my girls go to these sort of places often, which is a prudence 
that I dare say you approve as much as myself, I would wish to have the most 
made of them at once; and, therefore, as I've no doubt but they'll strike up a 
dance, after having eat what they think proper, why I would advise you, Mr. 
Mandlebert, to let Indiana trip it away till she's heartily tired, for else 
she'll never give it up, with a good grace, of her own accord.'

'Certainly, sir,' answered Edgar, 'I shall not hurry the ladies.'

'O, as to any of the rest,' interrupted Sir Hugh, 'they'll be as soon satisfied 
as yourself, except,' lowering his voice, 'Mrs. Margland, who, between friends, 
seems to me as glad of one of those freaks, as when she was but sixteen; which 
how long it is since she was no more I can't pretend to say, being a point she 
never mentions.'

Then addressing them in general: 'I wish you a good breakfast,' he cried, 'with 
all my heart, which I think you pretty well deserve, considering you go so far 
for it, with one close at your elbow, but just swallowed. And so, my dear 
Indiana, I hope you won't tire Mr. Mandlebert more than can't be avoided.'

'How came you to engage Indiana again, Mandlebert?' cried Lionel, in their way 
to the carriage.

'Because,' said Miss Margland, finding he hesitated, 'there is no other partner 
so proper for Miss Lynmere.'

'And pray what's the matter with me? why am not I as proper as Mandlebert?'

'Because you are her relation, to be sure!'

'Well,' cried he, vaulting his horse, 'if I meet but the charming widow, I 
shall care for none of you.'
