
An Answer

Mr. and Mrs. Tyrold and Lavinia were at breakfast when Sir Hugh entered their 
parlour, the next morning. 'Brother,' he cried, 'I have something of great 
importance to tell you, which it is very fit my sister should hear too; for 
which reason, I make no doubt but my dear Lavinia's good sense will leave the 
room, without waiting for a hint.'

Lavinia instantly retired.

'O, my dear brother,' continued the baronet; 'do you know here's a young chap, 
who appears to be a rather good sort of man, which is so much the worse, who 
has been falling in love with Eugenia?'

He then delivered the two letters to Mr. Tyrold.

'Now the only thing that hurts me in this business is, that this young man, who 
Miss Margland calls a person of fashion, writes as well as Clermont would do 
himself; though that is what I shall never own to Eugenia, which I hope is no 
sin being all for her own sake; that is to say, for Clermont's.'

Mr. Tyrold, after attentively reading the letters, gave them to his wife, and 
made many inquiries concerning their writer, and his acquaintance with Eugenia 
and Miss Margland.

'Why it was all brought about,' said Sir Hugh, 'by their going to a ball and a 
public breakfast; which is a thing my little Camilla is not at all to blame 
for, because if nobody had put it in her head, she would not have known there 
was a thing of the kind. And, indeed, it was but natural in poor Lionel 
neither, to set her agog, the chief fault lying in the assizes; to which my 
particular objection is against the lawyers, who come into a town to hang and 
transport the poor, by way of keeping the peace, and then encourage the rich to 
make all the noise and riot they can, by their own junkettings; for which, 
however, being generally, I believe, pretty good scholars, I make no doubt but 
they have their own reasons.'

'I flatter myself,' said Mrs. Tyrold, scarce deigning to finish the letters, 
'Eugenia, young as she is, will need no counsel how to estimate a writer such 
as this. What must the man be, who, presuming upon his personal influence, 
ventures to claim her concurrence in an application to her friends, though he 
has seen her but twice, and knows her to be destitute of the smallest knowledge 
of his principles, his character, or his situation in life?'

'Good lack!' cried the baronet, 'what a prodigious poor head I must have! here 
I could hardly sleep all night, for thinking what a fine letter this 
jackanapes, which I shall make no more apology for calling him, had been 
writing, fearing it would cut up poor Clermont in her opinion, for all his 
grand tour.'

Perfectly restored to ease, he now bad them good morning; but Mr. Tyrold 
entreated him to stay till they had settled how to get rid of the business.

'My dear brother,' he answered, 'I want no more help now, since I have got your 
opinion, that is, my sister's, which I take it for granted is the same. I make 
no doubt but Eugenia will pretty near have writ her foul copy by the time I get 
home, which Dr. Orkborne may overlook for her, to the end that this Mr. Upstart 
may have no more fault to find against it.'

They both desired to dine at Cleves, that they might speak themselves with 
Eugenia.

'And how,' said Mr. Tyrold, with a strong secret emotion, 'how goes on Edgar 
with Indiana?'

'Vastly well, vastly well indeed! not that I pretend to speak for myself, being 
rather too dull in these matters, owing to never entering upon them in the 
right season, as I intend to tell other young men doing the same.'

He then, in warm terms, narrated the accounts given him by Miss Margland of the 
security of the conquest of Indiana.

Mr. Tyrold fixed his hour for expecting the carriage, and the baronet desired 
that Lavinia should be of the party; 'because,' he said, 'I see she has the 
proper discretion, when she is wanted to go out of the way; which must be the 
same with Camilla and Indiana, too, to-day, as well as with young Mr. Edgar; 
for I don't think it prudent to trust such new beginners with every thing that 
goes on, till they get a little older.'

The anxiety of Mr. Tyrold, concerning Bellamy, was now mingled with a cruel 
regret in relation to Mandlebert. Even his own upright conduct could scarce 
console him for the loss of his favourite hope, and he almost repented that he 
had not been more active in endeavouring to preserve it.

All that passed in his mind was read and participated in by his partner, whose 
displeasure was greater, though her mortification could but be equal. 'That 
Edgar,' said she, 'should have kept his heart wholly untouched, would less have 
moved my wonder; he has a peculiar, though unconscious delicacy in his nature, 
which results not from insolence nor presumption, but from his own invariable 
and familiar exercise of every virtue and of every duty: the smallest deviation 
is offensive, and even the least inaccuracy is painful to him. Was it possible, 
then, to be prepared for such an election as this? He has disgraced my 
expectations; he has played the common part of a mere common young man, whose 
eye is his sole governor.'

'My Georgiana,' said Mr. Tyrold, 'I am deeply disappointed. Our two eldest 
girls are but slightly provided for; and Eugenia is far more dangerously 
circumstanced, in standing so conspicuously apart, as a prize to some 
adventurer. One of these three precious cares I had fondly concluded certain of 
protection and happiness; for which ever I might have bestowed upon Edgar 
Mandlebert, I should have considered as the most fortunate of her sex. Let us, 
however, rejoice for Indiana; no one can more need a protector; and, next to my 
own three girls, there is no one for whom I am so much interested. I grieve, 
however, for Edgar himself, whose excellent judgment will, in time, assert its 
rights, though passion, at this period, has set it aside.'

'I am too angry with him for pity,' said Mrs. Tyrold; 'nor is his understanding 
of a class that has any claim to such lenity: I had often thought our gentle 
Lavinia almost born to be his wife, and no one could more truly have deserved 
him. But the soft perfection of her character relieves me from any apprehension 
for her conduct, and almost all my solicitude devolves upon Camilla. For our 
poor Eugenia I had never indulged a hope of his choice; though that valuable, 
unfortunate girl, with every unearned defect about her, intrinsically merits 
him, with all his advantages, his accomplishments, and his virtues: but to 
appreciate her, uninfluenced by pecuniary views, to which he is every way 
superior, was too much to expect from so young a man. My wishes, therefore, had 
guided him to our Camilla, that sweet, open, generous, inconsiderate girl, 
whose feelings are all virtues, but whose impulses have no restraints: I have 
not a fear for her, when she can act with deliberation; but fear is almost all 
I have left, when I consider her as led by the start of the moment. With him, 
however, she would have been the safest, and with himâ€”next alone to her 
mother, the happiest of her sex.'

The kindest acknowledgments repaid this sympathy of sentiment, and they agreed 
that their felicity would have been almost too complete for this lower world, 
if such an event had come to pass. 'Nevertheless its failure,' added Mrs. 
Tyrold, 'is almost incredible, and wholly unpardonable. That Indiana should 
vanquish where Lavinia and Camilla have failed! I feel indignant at such a 
triumph of mere external unintelligent beauty.'

Eugenia received her parents with the most bashful confusion; yet they found, 
upon conversing with her, it was merely from youthful shame, and not from any 
dangerous prepossession. The observations of Camilla had broken that spell with 
which a first declaration of regard is apt to entangle unreflecting 
inexperience; and by teaching her to less value the votary, had made the 
conquest less an object of satisfaction. She was gratified by the permission of 
her uncle to write her own answer, which was now produced.

To Alphonso Bellamy, Esq.

Sir,

I am highly sensible to the honour of your partiality, which I regret it is not 
possible for me to deserve. Be not, therefore, offended, and still less suffer 
yourself to be afflicted, when I confess I have only my poor thanks to offer, 
and poor esteem to return, for your unmerited goodness. Dwell not, sir, upon 
this disappointment, but receive my best wishes for your restored happiness; 
for never can I forget a distinction to which I have so little claim. Believe 
me,

Sir,                                 
Your very much obliged,                   
and most grateful humble servant,          
Eugenia Tyrold.

Mr. Tyrold, who delighted to see how completely, in her studies with Dr. 
Orkborne, she had escaped any pedantry or affectation, and even preserved all 
the native humility of her artless character, returned her the letter with an 
affectionate embrace, and told her he could desire no alteration but that of 
omitting the word grateful at the conclusion.

Mrs. Tyrold was far less satisfied. She wished it to be completely re-written; 
protesting, that a man who, in all probability, was a mere fortune-hunter, 
would infer from so gentle a dismission encouragement rather than repulse.

Sir Hugh said there was one thing only he desired to have added, which was a 
hint of a pre-engagement with a relation of her own.

Eugenia, at this, coloured and retreated; and Mrs. Tyrold reminded the baronet, 
with some displeasure, of his promise to guard the secret of his project. Sir 
Hugh, a little disturbed, said it never broke out from him but by accident, 
which he would take care should never get the upper hand again. He would not, 
however, consent to have the letter altered, which he said would be an affront 
to the learning of Eugenia, unless it were done by Dr. Orkborne himself, who, 
being her master, had a right to correct her first penmanship.

Dr. Orkborne, being called upon, slightly glanced his eye over the letter, but 
made no emendation, saying: 'I believe it will do very sufficiently; but I have 
only concerned myself with the progress of Miss Eugenia in the Greek and Latin 
languages; any body can teach her English.'

The fond parents finished their visit in full satisfaction with their 
irreproachable Eugenia, and with the joy of seeing their darling Camilla as 
happy and as disengaged as when she had left them; but Mandlebert had spent the 
day abroad, and escaped, therefore, the observations with which they had meant 
to have investigated his sentiments. Indiana, with whom they conversed more 
than usual, and with the most scrutinizing attention, offered nothing either in 
manner or matter to rescue his decision from their censure: Mrs. Tyrold, 
therefore, rejoiced at his absence, lest a coolness she knew not how to 
repress, should have led him to surmise her disappointment. Her husband 
besought her to be guarded: 'We had no right,' he said, 'to the disposal of his 
heart; and Indiana, however he may find her inadequate to his future 
expectations, will not disgrace his present choice. She is beautiful, she is 
young, and she is innocent; this in early life is sufficient for felicity; and 
Edgar is yet too new in the world to be aware how much of life remains when 
youth is gone, and too unpractised to foresee, that beauty loses its power even 
before it loses its charms, and that the season of declining nature sighs 
deeply for the support which sympathy and intelligence can alone bestow.'
