
Various Confabulations

Mr. Tyrold saw, at first, the renewed visits of Edgar at Cleves with extreme 
satisfaction; but while all his hopes were alive from an intercourse almost 
perpetual, he perceived, with surprise and perplexity, that his daughter became 
more and more pensive after every interview: and as Edgar, this evening, 
quitted the house, he observed tears start into her eyes as she went up stairs 
to her own room.

Alarmed and disappointed, he thought it now high time to investigate the state 
of the affair, and to encourage or prevent future meetings, as it appeared to 
him to be propitious or hopeless.

Penetrated with the goodness, while lamenting the indifference of Edgar, 
Camilla had just reached her room; when, as she turned round to shut her door, 
Mr. Tyrold appeared before her.

Hastily, with the back of her hand, brushing off the tears from her eyes, she 
said, 'May I go to my uncle, Sir?... can my uncle admit me?'

'He can always admit you,' he answered; 'but, just now, you must forget him a 
moment, and consign yourself to your father.'

He then entered, shut the door, and making her sit down by him, said, 'What is 
this sorrow that assails my Camilla? Why is the light heart of my dear and 
happy child thus dejected?'

Speech and truth were always one with Camilla; who, as she could not in this 
instance declare what were her feelings, remained mute and confounded.

'Hesitate not, my dear girl,' cried he kindly, 'to unbosom your griefs or your 
apprehensions, where they will be received with all the tenderness due to such 
a confidence, and held sacred from every human inspection; unless you permit me 
yourself to entrust your best and wisest friend.'

Camilla now trembled, but could not even attempt to speak.

He saw her disorder, and presently added, 'I will forbear to probe your 
feelings, when you have satisfied me in one doubt;â€”Is the sadness I have of 
late remarked in you the effect of secret personal disturbance, or of 
disappointed expectation?'

Camilla could neither answer nor look up: she was convinced, by this question, 
that the subject of her melancholy was understood, and felt wholly overcome by 
the deeply distressing confusion, with which wounded pride and unaffected 
virgin modesty impress a youthful female, in the idea of being suspected of a 
misplaced, or an unrequited partiality.

Her silence, a suffocating sigh, and her earnest endeavour to hide her face, 
easily explained to Mr. Tyrold all that passed within; and respecting rather 
than wishing to conquer a shame flowing from fearful delicacy, 'I would spare 
you,' he said, 'all investigation whatever, could I be certain you are not 
called into any action; but, in that case, I know not that I can justify to 
myself so implicit a confidence, in youth and inexperience so untried in 
difficulties, so unused to evil or embarrassment as yours. Tell me then, my 
dear Camilla, do you sigh under the weight of any disingenuous conduct? or do 
you suffer from some suspence which you have no means of terminating?'

'My dearest father, no!' cried she, sinking upon his breast. 'I have no 
suspence!'

She gasped for breath.

'And how has it been removed, my child?' said Mr. Tyrold, in a mournful tone; 
'has any deception, any ungenerous art....'

'O no, no!... he is incapable ... he is superior ... he....' She stopt 
abruptly; shocked at the avowal these few words at once inferred of her 
partiality, of its hopelessness, and of its object.

She walked, confused, to a corner of the room, and, leaning against the 
wainscot, enveloped her face in her handkerchief, with the most painful 
sensations of shame.

Mr. Tyrold remained in deep meditation. Her regard for Edgar he had already 
considered as undoubted, and her undisguised acknowledgment excited his 
tenderest sympathy: but to find she thought it without return, and without 
hope, penetrated him with grief. Not only his own fond view of the attractions 
of his daughter, but all he had observed, even from his childhood, in Edgar, 
had induced him to believe she was irresistibly formed to captivate him; and 
what had lately passed had seemed a confirmation of all he had expected. 
Camilla, nevertheless, exculpated him from all blame; and, while touched by her 
artlessness, and honouring her truth, he felt, at least, some consolation to 
find that Edgar, whom he loved as a son, was untainted by deceit, unaccused of 
any evil. He concluded that some unfortunate secret entanglement, or some 
mystery not yet to be developed, directed compulsatorily his conduct, and 
checked the dictates of his taste and inclination.

Gently, at length, approaching her, 'My dearest child,' he said, 'I will ask 
you nothing further; all that is absolutely essential for me to know, I have 
gathered. You will never, I am certain, forget the noble mother whom you are 
bound to revere in imitating, nor the affectionate father whom your 
ingenuousness renders the most indulgent of your friends. Dry up your tears 
then, my Camilla, and command your best strength to conceal for ever their 
source, and, most especially ... from its cause.'

He then embraced, and left her.

'Yes, my dearest father,' cried she, as she shut the door, 'most perfect and 
most lenient of human beings! yes, I will obey your dictates; I will hide till 
I can conquer this weak emotion, and no one shall ever know, and Edgar least of 
all, that a daughter of yours has a feeling she ought to disguise!'

Elevated by the kindness of a father so adored, to deserve his good opinion now 
included every wish. The least severity would have chilled her confidence, the 
least reproof would have discouraged all effort to self-conquest; but, while 
his softness had soothed, his approbation had invigorated her; and her feelings 
received additional energy from the conscious generosity with which she had 
represented Edgar as blameless. Blameless, however, in her own breast, she 
could not deem him: his looks, his voice, his manner, ... words that 
occasionally dropt from him, and meanings yet more expressive which his eyes or 
his attentions had taken in charge, all, from time to time, had told a 
flattering tale, which, though timidity and anxious earnestness had obscured 
from her perfect comprehension, her hopes and her sympathy had prevented from 
wholly escaping her. Yet what, internally, she could not defend she forgave; 
and, acquitting him of all intentional deceit, concluded that what he had felt 
for her, he had thought too slight and immaterial to deserve repressing on his 
own part, or notice on her's. To continue with him her present sisterly conduct 
was all she had to study, not doubting but that what as yet was effort, would 
in time become natural.

Strengthened thus in fortitude, she descended cheerfully to supper, where Mr. 
Tyrold, though he saw with pain that her spirits were constrained, felt the 
fondest satisfaction in the virtue of her exertion.

Her night passed in the consolation of self-applause. My dear father, thought 
she, will see I strive to merit his lenity, and that soothing consideration 
with the honourable friendship of Edgar, will be sufficient for the happiness 
of my future life, in the single and tranquil state in which it will be spent.

Thus comforted, she again met the eye of Mr. Tyrold the next day at breakfast; 
in the midst of which repast Edgar entered the parlour. The tea she was 
drinking was then rather gulped than sipped; yet she maintained an air of 
unconcern, and returned his salutation with apparent composure.

Edgar, while addressing to Mr. Tyrold his inquiries concerning Sir Hugh, saw, 
from the window, his servant, whom he had out-galloped, thrown with violence 
from his horse. He rushed out of the parlour; and the first person to rise, 
with involuntary intent to follow him, was Camilla. But, as she reached the 
hall-door, she saw that the man was safe, and perceived that her father was the 
only person who had left the room besides herself. Ashamed, she returned, and 
found the female party collected at the windows.

Hoping to retrieve the error of her eagerness, she seated herself at the table, 
and affected to finish her breakfast.

Eugenia told her they had discovered the cause of the accident, which had been 
owing to a sharp stone that had penetrated into the horse's hoof, and which 
Edgar was now endeavouring to extract.

A general scream, just then, from the window party, and a cry from Eugenia of 
'O Edgar!' carried her again to the hall-door with the swiftness of lightning, 
calling out, 'Where?... What?... Good Heaven!...'

Molly Mill, accidentally there before her, said, as she approached, that the 
horse had kicked Mr. Mandlebert upon the shoulder.

Every thing but tenderness and terror was now forgotten by Camilla; she darted 
forward with unrestrained velocity, and would have given, in a moment, the most 
transporting amazement to Edgar, and to herself the deepest shame, but that Mr. 
Tyrold, who alone had his face that way, stopt, and led her back to the house, 
saying, 'There is no mischief; a bee stung the poor animal at the instant the 
stone was extracted, and the surprise and pain made it kick; but, fortunately, 
without any bad effect. I wish to know how your uncle is; I should be glad you 
would go and sit with him till I can come.'

With these words he left her; and, though abashed and overset, she found no 
sensation so powerful as joy for the safety of Edgar.

Still, however, too little at ease for conversing with her uncle, she went 
straight to her own chamber, and flew involuntarily to a window, whence the 
first object that met her eyes was her father, who was anxiously looking up. 
She retreated, utterly confounded, and threw herself upon a chair at the other 
end of the room.

Shame now was her only sensation. The indiscretion of her first surprise, she 
knew, he must forgive, though she blushed at its recollection; but a solicitude 
so pertinacious, an indulgence so repeated of feelings he had enjoined her to 
combat ... how could she hope for his pardon? or how obtain her own, to have 
forfeited an approbation so precious?

She could not go to her uncle; she would have remained where she was till 
summoned to dinner, if the house-maid, after finishing all her other work, had 
not a third time returned to inquire if she might clean her room.

She then determined to repair to the library, where she was certain only to 
encounter Eugenia, who would not torment, or Dr. Orkborne, who would not 
perceive her: but at the bottom of the stairs she was stopt by Miss Margland, 
who, with a malicious smile, asked if she was going to hold the bason?

'What bason?' cried she, surprised.

'The bason for the surgeon.'

'What surgeon?' repeated she, alarmed.

'Mr. Burton, who is come to bleed Mr. Mandlebert.'

She asked nothing more. She felt extremely faint, but made her way into the 
park, to avoid further conference.

Here, in the most painful suspence, dying for information, yet shirking whoever 
could give it her, she remained, till she saw the departure of the surgeon. She 
then went round by a back way to the apartment of Eugenia, who informed her 
that the contusion, though not dangerous, was violent, and that Mr. Tyrold had 
insisted upon immediate bleeding. The surgeon had assured them this precaution 
would prevent any ill consequence; but Sir Hugh, hearing from the servants what 
had happened, had desired that Edgar would not return home till the next day.

The joy of Camilla, that nothing was more serious, banished all that was 
disagreeable from her thoughts, till she was called back to reflections less 
consoling, by meeting Mr. Tyrold, as she was returning to her own room; who, 
with a gravity unusual, desired to speak with her, and preceded her into the 
chamber.

Trembling, and filled with shame, she followed, shut the door, and remained at 
it without daring to look up.

'My dear Camilla,' cried he with earnestness, 'let me not hope in vain for that 
exertion you have promised me, and to which I know you to be fully equal. Risk 
not, my dear girl, to others, those outward marks of sensibility which, to 
common or unfeeling observers, seem but the effect of an unbecoming remissness 
in the self-command which should dignify every female who would do herself 
honour. I had hoped, in this house at least, you would not have been 
misunderstood; but I have this moment been undeceived: Miss Margland has just 
expressed a species of compassion for what she presumes to be the present state 
of your mind, that has given me the severest pain.'

He stopt, for Camilla looked thunderstruck.

Approaching her, then, with a look of concern, and a voice of tenderness, he 
kindly took her hand, and added: 'I do not tell you this in displeasure, but to 
put you upon your guard. You will hear from Eugenia that we shall not dine 
alone; and from what I have dropt you will gather how little you can hope to 
escape scrutiny. Exert yourself to obviate all humiliating surmises, and you 
will amply be repaid by the balm of self-approbation.'

He then kissed her, and quitted the room.

She now remained in utter despair: the least idea of disgrace totally broke her 
spirit, and she sat upon the same spot on which Mr. Tyrold had left her, till 
the ringing of the second dinner bell.

She then gloomily resolved to plead an head-ache, and not to appear.

When a footman tapt at her door, to acquaint her every body was seated at the 
table, she sent down this excuse: forming to herself the further determination, 
that the same should suffice for the evening, and for the next morning, that 
she might avoid the sight of Edgar, in presence either of her father or Miss 
Margland.

Eugenia, with kind alarm, came to know what was the matter, and informed her, 
that Sir Hugh had been so much concerned at the accident of Edgar, that he had 
insisted upon seeing him, and, after heartily shaking hands, had promised to 
think no more of past mistakes and disappointments, as they had now been 
cleared up to the county, and desired him to take up his abode at Cleves for a 
week.

Camilla heard this with mixt pleasure and pain. She rejoiced that Edgar should 
be upon his former terms with her beloved uncle; but how preserve the caution 
demanded from her for so long a period, in the constant sight of her now 
watchful father, and the malicious Miss Margland?

She had added to her own difficulties by this present absconding, and, with 
severe self-blame, resolved to descend to tea. But, while settling how to act, 
after her sister had left her, she was struck with hearing the name of 
Mandlebert pronounced by Mary, the house-maid, who was talking with Molly Mill 
upon the landing place. Why it had been spoken she knew not; but Molly 
answered: 'Dearee me, never mind; I'll help you to do his room, if Nanny don't 
come in time. My little mistress would rather do it herself, than he should 
want for anything.'

'Why, it's natural enough,' said Mary, 'for young ladies to like young 
gentlemen; and there's none other comes a nigh 'em, which I often thinks dull 
enough for our young misses. And, to be certain, Mr. Mandlebert would be as 
pretty a match for one of 'em as a body could desire.'

'And his man,' said Molly, 'is as pretty a gentleman sort of person, to my 
mind, as his master. I'm sure I'm as glad as my young lady when they comes to 
the house.'

'O, as to Miss Eugeny,' said Mary, 'I believe, in my conscience, she likes our 
crack-headed old Doctor as well as e'er a young gentleman in Christendom; for 
there she'll sit with him, hour by hour, poring over such a heap of stuff as 
never was seed, reading, first one, then t'other, God knows what; for I believe 
never nobody heard the like of it before; and all the time never give the old 
Doctor a cross word.â€”'

'She never given nobody a cross word,' interrupted Molly; 'if I was Mr. 
Mandlebert, I'd sooner have her than any of 'em, for all she's such a nidging 
little thing.'

'For certain,' said Mary, 'she's very good, and a deal of good she does, to all 
as asks her; but Miss Camilla for my money. She's all alive and merry, and 
makes poor master young again to look at her. I wish Mr. Mandlebert would have 
her, for I have overheard Miss Margland telling Miss Lynmere she was desperate 
fond of him, and did all she could to get him.'

Camilla felt flushed with the deepest resentment, and could scarcely command 
herself to forbear charging Miss Margland with this persecuting cruelty.

Nanny, the under house-maid, now joining them, said she had been detained to 
finish altering a curtain for Miss Margland. 'And the cross old Frump,' she 
added, 'is in a worse spite than ever, and she kept abusing that sweet Mr. 
Mandlebert to Miss Lynmere all the while, till she went down to dinner, and she 
said she was sure it was all Miss Camilla's doings his staying here again, for 
she could come over master for any thing: and she said she supposed it was to 
have another catch at the young 'Squire's heart, but she hoped he would not be 
such a fool.'

'I'm sure I wish he would,' cried Molly Mill, 'if it was only to spite her, 
she's such a nasty old viper. And Miss Camilla's always so good-natured, and so 
affable, she'd make him a very agreeable wife, I dare say.'

'And she's mortal fond of him, that's true,' said Mary, 'for when they was both 
here, I always see her a running to the window, to see who was a coming into 
the park, when he was rode out; and when he was in the house, she never so much 
as went to peep, if there come six horses, one after t'other. And she was 
always a saying, "Mary, who's in the parlour? Mary, who's below?" while he was 
here; but before he come, duce a bite did she ask about nobody.'

'I like when I meets her,' said Molly Mill, 'to tell her Mr. Mandlebert's here, 
Miss; or Mr. Mandlebert's there, Miss;â€”Dearee me, one may almost see one self 
in her eyes, it makes them shine so.'

Camilla could endure no more; she arose, and walked about the room; and the 
maids, who had concluded her at dinner, hearing her step, hurried away, to 
finish their gossiping in the room of Mandlebert.

Camilla now felt wholly sunk; the persecutions of Miss Margland seemed nothing 
to this blow: they were cruel, she could therefore repine at them; they were 
unprovoked, she could therefore repel them: but to find her secret feelings, 
thus generally spread, and familiarity commented upon, from her own unguarded 
conduct, exhausted, at once, patience, fortitude, and hope, and left her no 
wish but to quit Cleves while Edgar should remain there.

Certain, however, that her father would not permit her to return to Etherington 
alone, a visit to Mrs. Arlbery was the sole refuge she could suggest; and she 
determined to solicit his permission to accept immediately the invitation of 
that lady.
