
Mount Ephraim

This expected guest arrived early. Camilla received her with the only sensation 
of pleasure she had experienced at Tunbridge. Yet what she excited seemed still 
stronger: the fair stranger besought her friendship as a solace to her 
existence, and hung upon her as upon a treasure long lost, and dearly 
recovered. Camilla soon caught the infection of her softness, and felt a 
similar desire to cultivate her regard. She found her beauty attractive, her 
voice melodious, and her manners bewitchingly caressing.

Fearing, nevertheless, while yet in ignorance of her connexions, to provoke 
further ridicule from Mrs. Arlbery by going abroad with her, she proposed 
deferring to return her visit till another day: the lady consented, and they 
spent together two hours, which each thought had been but two minutes, when 
Mrs. Arlbery summoned Camilla to a walk.

The fair unknown then took leave, saying her servant was in waiting; and 
Camilla and Mrs. Arlbery went to the bookseller's.

Here, that lady was soon joined by Lord O'Lerney and General Kinsale, who were 
warm admirers of her vivacity and observations. Mr. Dennel took up the Daily 
Advertiser; his daughter stationed herself at the door to see the walkers upon 
the Pantiles; Sir Theophilus Jarard, under colour of looking at a popular 
pamphlet, was indulging in a nap in a corner; Lord Newford, noticing nothing, 
except his own figure as he past a mirrour, was shuffling loud about the floor, 
which was not much embellished by the scraping of his boots; and Sir Sedley 
Clarendel, lounging upon a chair in the middle of the shop, sat eating bon bons.

Mrs. Arlbery, for some time, confined her talents to general remarks: but 
finding these failed to move a muscle in the face of Sir Sedley, at whom they 
were directed, she suddenly exclaimed: 'Pray, my Lord O'Lerney, do you know any 
thing of Sir Sedley Clarendel?'

'Not so much,' answered his Lordship, 'as I could wish; but I hope to improve 
my acquaintance with him.'

'Why then, my lord, I am much afraid you will conclude, when you see him in one 
of those reveries, from the total vacancy of his air, that he is thinking of 
nothing. But pray permit me to take his part. Those apparent cogitations, to 
which he is so much addicted, are moments only of pretended torpor, but of real 
torment, devoted, not as they appear, to supine insipidity, but to painful 
secret labour how next he may call himself into notice. Nevertheless, my lord, 
don't let what I have said hurt him in your opinion; he is quaint, to be sure, 
but there's no harm in him. He lives in my neighbourhood; and, I assure your 
lordship, he is, upon the whole, what may be called a very good sort of man.'

Here she yawned violently; and Sir Sedley, unable to maintain his position, 
twice crossed his legs, and then arose and took up a book: while Lord Newford 
burst into so loud a laugh, that he awakened Sir Theophilus Jarard, by echoing, 
'A good sort of man! O poor Clary!... O hang it!... O curse it!... poor Clary!'

'What's the matter with Clary?' cried Sir Theophilus, rubbing his eyes; 'I have 
been boring myself with this pamphlet, till I hardly know whether I am awake or 
asleep.'

'Why, he's a good sort of man!' replied Lord Newford.

Sir Sedley, though he expected, and even hoped for some pointed strictures, and 
could have defied even abuse, could not stand this mortifying praise; and, 
asking for the subscription books, which, already, he had twice examined, said: 
'Is there any body here one knows?'

'O, ay, have you any names?' cried Lord Newford, seizing them first; and with 
some right, as they were the only books in the shop he ever read.

'Come, I'll be generous,' said Mrs. Arlbery, 'and add another signature against 
your lordship's next lecture.'

She then wrote her name, and threw down half-a-guinea. Camilla, to whom the 
book was next presented, concluded this the established custom, and, from mere 
timidity, did the same; though somewhat disturbed to leave herself no more gold 
than she gave. Miss Dennel followed; but her father, who said he did not come 
to Tunbridge to read, which he could do at home, positively refused to 
subscribe.

Sir Theophilus now, turning, or rather, tossing over the leaves, cried: 'I see 
no name here one knows any thing of, but Lady Alithea Selmore.'

'Why, there's nobody else here,' said Lord Newford, 'not a soul!'

Almost every body present bowed; but wholly indifferent to reproof, he again 
whistled, again streamed up and down the room, and again took a bold and full 
survey of himself in the looking-glass.

'On the contrary,' cried Sir Sedley, 'I hear there is a most extraordinary fine 
creature lately arrived, who is invincible to a degree.'

'O that's Mrs. Berlinton;' said Sir Theophilus; 'yes, she's a pretty little 
thing.'

'She's very beautiful indeed,' said Lord O'Lerney.

'Where can one see her?' cried Mrs. Arlbery.

'If she is not at the Rooms to-night,' said Sir Sedley, 'I shall be stupified 
to petrifaction. They tell me she is a marvel of the first water; turning all 
heads by her beauty, winning all hearts by her sweetness, fascinating all 
attention by her talents, and setting all fashions by her elegance.'

'This paragon,' cried Mrs. Arlbery, to Camilla, 'can be no other than your 
mysterious fair. The description just suits your own.'

'But my fair mysterious,' said Camilla, 'is of a disposition the most retired, 
and seems so young, I don't at all think her married.'

'This divinity,' said Sir Sedley, 'for the blessing of everyone, yet

Lord of Himself, uncumber'd by a Wife[1],
is safely noosed; and amongst her attributes are two others cruel to 
desperation; she excited every hope by a sposo properly detestableâ€”yet gives 
birth to despair, by a coldness the most shivering.'

'And what,' said Mrs. Arlbery, 'is this Lady Alithea Selmore?'

'Lady Alithea Selmore,' drily, but with a smile, answered General Kinsale.

'Nay, nay, that's not to be mentioned irreverently,' returned Mrs. Arlbery; 'a 
title goes for a vast deal, where there is nothing else; and, where there is 
something, doubles its value.

Mr. Dennel, saying he found, by the newspaper, a house was to be sold upon 
Mount Ephraim, which promised to be a pretty good bargain, proposed walking 
thither, to examine what sort of condition it was in.

Lord O'Lerney inquired if Camilla had yet seen Mount Ephraim. No, she answered; 
and a general party was made for an airing. Sir Sedley ordered his phaeton; 
Mrs. Arlbery drove Camilla in her's; Miss Dennel walked with her father; and 
the rest of the gentlemen went on horseback.

Arrived at Mount Ephraim, they all agreed to alight, and enjoy the view and 
pure air of the hill, while Mr. Dennel visited the house. But, just as Mrs. 
Arlbery had descended from the phaeton, her horses, taking fright at some 
object that suddenly struck them, reared up, in a manner alarming to the 
spectators, and still more terrific to Camilla, in whose hands Mrs. Arlbery had 
left the reins: and the servant, who stood at the horses' heads, received a 
kick that laid him flat on the ground.

'O, jump out! jump out!' cried Miss Dennel, 'or else you'll be murdered!'

'No! no! keep your seat, and hold the reins!' cried Mrs. Arlbery: 'For heaven's 
sake, don't jump out!'

Camilla, mentally giddy, but personally courageous, was sufficiently mistress 
of herself to obey the last injunction, though with infinite labour, 
difficulty, and terror, the horses plunging and flouncing incessantly.

'Don't you think she'll be killed?' cried Lord Newford, dismounting, lest his 
own horse should also take fright. 'Do you think one could help her?' said Sir 
Theophilus Jarard, steadily holding the bridle of his mare from the same 
apprehension.

Lord O'Lerney was already on foot to afford her assistance, when the horses, 
suddenly turning round, gave to the beholders the dreadful menace of going down 
the steep declivity of Mount Ephraim full gallop.

Camilla now, appalled, had no longer power to hold the reins; she let them go, 
with an idea of flinging herself out of the carriage, when Sir Sedley, who had 
darted like lightning from his phaeton, presented himself at the horses' heads, 
on the moment of their turning, and, at the visible and imminent hazard of his 
life, happily stopt them while she jumped to the ground. They then, with a fury 
that presently dashed the phaeton to pieces, plunged down the hill.

The fright of Camilla had not robbed her of her senses, and the exertion and 
humanity of Sir Sedley seemed to restore to him the full possession of his own: 
yet one of his knees was so much hurt, that he sunk upon the grass.

Penetrated with surprise, as well as gratitude, Camilla, notwithstanding her 
own tremor, was the first to make the most anxious inquiries: secretly, 
however, sighing to herself: Ah! had Edgar thus rescued me! yet struck equally 
with a sense of obligation and of danger, from the horrible, if not fatal 
mischief she had escaped, and from the extraordinary hazard and kindness by 
which she had been saved, she expressed her concern and acknowledgments with a 
softness, that even Sir Sedley himself could not listen to unmoved.

He received, indeed, from this adventure, almost every species of pleasure of 
which his mind was capable. His natural courage, which he had nearly 
annihilated, as well as forgotten, by the effeminate part he was systematically 
playing, seemed to rejoice in being again exercised; his good nature was 
delighted by the essential service he had performed; his vanity was gratified 
by the publicity of the praise it brought forth; and his heart itself 
experienced something like an original feeling, unspoilt by the apathy of 
satiety, from the sensibility he had awakened in the young and lovely Camilla.

The party immediately flocked around him, and he was conveyed to a house 
belonging to Lord O'Lerney, who resided upon Mount Ephraim, and his lordship's 
carriage was ordered to take him to his apartment at the hotel.

Mrs. Arlbery, whose high spirits were totally subdued by the terror with which 
she had been seized at the danger of Camilla, was so delighted by her rescue, 
and the courage with which it was effected, that all her spleen against Sir 
Sedley was changed into the warmest approbation. When he was put into the 
coach, she insisted upon seeing him safe to the hotel; Camilla, with her usual 
inartificial quickness, seconding the motion, and Lord O'Lerney, a nobleman far 
more distinguished by benevolence and urbanity than by his rank, taking the 
fourth place himself. The servant, who was considerably hurt, he desired might 
remain at his house.

In descending Mount Ephraim, Camilla turned giddy with the view of what she had 
escaped, and cast her eyes with doubled thankfulness upon Sir Sedley as her 
preserver. Fragments of the phaeton were strewed upon the road; one of the 
horses [lay] dead at the bottom of the hill; and the other was so much injured 
as to be totally disabled for future service.

When they came to the hotel, they all alighted with the young baronet, Camilla 
with as little thought, as Mrs. Arlbery with little care for doing any thing 
that was unusual. They waited in an adjoining apartment till they were assured 
nothing of any consequence was the matter, and Lord O'Lerney then carried them 
to their new lodging upon Mount Pleasant.

Mrs. Arlbery bore her own share in this accident with perfect good-humour, 
saying it would do her infinite good, by making her a rigid Å“conomist; for she 
could neither live without a phaeton, nor yet build one, and buy ponies, but by 
parsimonious savings from all other expenses.

At night they went again to the Rooms. But Mrs. Arlbery found in them as little 
amusement as Camilla. Sir Sedley was not there, either to attack or to flatter; 
the celebrated Mrs. Berlinton still appeared not to undergo a scrutiny; and 
Lady Alithea Selmore sat at the upper end of the apartment, attended by all the 
beaux, except the General, now at Tunbridge.

This was not to be supported. She arose, and declaring she would take her tea 
with the invalid, bid the General escort her to his room.

In their way out, she perceived the assembly books. Recollecting she had not 
subscribed, she entered her name, but protested she could afford but 
half-a-guinea, upon her present new and avaricious plan.

Camilla, with much secret consternation, concluded it impossible to give less; 
and a few shillings were now all that remained in her purse. Her uneasiness, 
however, presently passed away, upon recollecting she should want no more 
money, as she was now free of the rooms, and of the library, and equipped in 
attire for the whole time she should stay.

Miss Dennel put down a guinea; but her father, telling her half-a-crown would 
have done, said, for that reason, he should himself pay nothing.

Sir Sedley received them with the most unaffected pleasure: forced upon 
solitude, and by no means free from pain, he had found no resource but in 
reading, which of late had been his least occupation, except the mere politics 
of the day. Even reflection had discovered its way to him, though a long 
banished guest, which had quitted her post, to make room for affectation, 
vanity, and every species of frivolity. Reduced, however, to be reasonable, 
even by this short confinement, he now felt the obligation of their charitable 
visit, and set his foppery and conceit apart, from a desire to entertain them. 
Camilla had not conceived he had the power of being so pleasantly natural; and 
the strong feeling of gratitude in her ever warm heart made her contribute what 
she was able to the cheerfulness of the evening.

Some time after, General Kinsale was called out, and presently returned with 
Major Cerwood, just arrived from the regiment; who, with some apology to Sir 
Sedley, hoped he might be pardoned for the liberty he took, upon hearing who 
was at the hotel, of preferring such society to the Rooms.

As the Major had nothing in him either brilliant or offensive, his sight, after 
the first salutations, was almost all of which the company was sensible.

Camilla, his sole object, he could not approach; she sat between the baronet 
and Mrs. Arlbery; and all her looks and all her attention were divided between 
them.

Mrs. Arlbery, emerging from the mortifications of neglect, which she had 
experienced, almost for the first time in her life, at the Rooms, was unusually 
alive and entertaining; Sir Sedley kept pace with her, and the discourse was so 
whimsical, that Camilla, amused, and willing to encourage a sensation so 
natural to her, after a sadness till now, for so long a time unremitting, once 
more heard and welcomed the sound of her own laughter.

It was instantly, however, and strangely checked; a sigh, so deep that it might 
rather be called a groan, made its way through the wainscot of the next 
apartment.

Much raillery followed the sight of her changed countenance; the hotel was 
pronounced to be haunted, and by a ghost reduced to that plight from her 
cruelty. But the good-humour and gaiety of the conversation soon brought her 
again to its tone; and time passed with general hilarity, till they observed 
that Miss Dennel, who, having no young female to talk with of her own views and 
affairs, was thoroughly tired, had fallen fast asleep upon her chair.

Her father was already gone home to a hot supper, which he had ordered in his 
own room, and meant to eat before their return; Mrs. Arlbery, to his great 
discomfort, allowing nothing to appear at night but fruit or oysters.

They now took leave, Mrs. Arlbery conducted by the General, and Camilla, by the 
Major; while Miss Dennel, unassisted and half asleep, stumbled, screamed, and 
fell, just before she reached the staircase.

The General was first to aid her; the Major, not choosing to quit Camilla; who, 
looking round at a light which came from the room whence the sigh they had 
heard had issued, perceived, as it glared in her eyes, it was held by Edgar.

Astonishment, pleasure, hope, and shame, took alternate rapid possession of her 
mind; but the last sensation was the first that visibly operated, and she 
snatched her hand involuntarily from the Major.

Mrs. Arlbery exclaimed, 'Bless me, Mr. Mandlebert! are you the ghost we heard 
sighing in that room yonder?'

Mandlebert attempted to make some slight answer; but his voice refused all 
sound.

She went on, then, to the carriage of Mr. Dennel, followed by her young ladies, 
and drove off for Mount Pleasant.
