
Strictures upon the Ton

The next day was appointed for the master of the ceremonies' ball; which proved 
a general rendezvous of all parties, and almost all classes of company.

Mrs. Mittin, in a morning visit to Camilla, found out that she had only the 
same cap for this occasion that she had worn upon every other; and, assuring 
her it was grown so old-fashioned, that not a lady's maid in Tunbridge would 
now be seen in it, she offered to pin her up a turban, which should come to 
next to nothing, yet should be the prettiest, and simplest, and cheapest thing 
that ever was seen.

Camilla, though a stranger to vanity, and without any natural turn to 
extravagance, was neither of an age, nor a philosophy, to be unmoved by the 
apprehension of being exposed to ridicule from her dress: she thankfully, 
therefore, accepted the proposal; and Mrs. Mittin, taking a guinea, said, she 
would pay Mrs. Tillden for the hat, at the same time that she bought a new 
handkerchief for the turban.

When she came back, however, she had only laid out a few shillings at another 
shop, for some articles, so cheap, she said it would have been a shame not to 
buy them; but without paying the bill, Mrs. Tillden having desired it might not 
be discharged till the young lady was leaving the Wells.

As the turban was made up from a pattern of one prepared for Mrs. Berlinton, 
Camilla had every reason to be satisfied of its elegance. Nor did Mrs. Mittin 
involve her in much distress how her own trouble might be recompensed; the cap 
she found unfit for Camilla, she could contrive, she said, to alter for 
herself; and as a friend had given her a ticket for the ball, it would be 
mighty convenient to her, as she had nothing of the kind ready.

Far different were the sensations with which Edgar and Camilla saw each other 
this night, from those with which, so lately they had met in the same 
apartment. Edgar thought her degenerating into the character of a coquette, and 
Camilla, in his intended tour, anticipated a period to all their intercourse.

She was received, meanwhile, in general, with peculiar and flattering 
attention. Sir Sedley Clarendel made up to her, with public smiles and 
courtesy; even Lord Newford and Sir Theophilus Jarard, though they passed by 
Mrs. Arlbery without speaking to her, singled out Camilla for their devoirs. 
The distinction paid her by the admired Mrs. Berlinton had now not only marked 
her as an object whom it would not be derogatory to treat with civility, but as 
one who might, hence-forward, be regarded herself as admitted into certain 
circles.

Mrs. Arlbery, though every way a woman of fashion, they conceived to be 
somewhat wanting in ton, since she presided in no party, was unnoticed by Lady 
Alithea Selmore, and unknown to Mrs. Berlinton.

Ton, in the scale of connoisseurs in the certain circles, is as much above 
fashion, as fashion is above fortune: for though the latter is an ingredient 
that all alike covet to possess, it is courted without being respected, and 
desired without being honoured, except only by those who, from earliest life, 
have been taught to earn it as a business. Ton, meanwhile, is as attainable 
without birth as without understanding, though in all the certain circles it 
takes place of either. To define what it is, would be as difficult to the most 
renowned of its votaries, as to an utter stranger to its attributes. That those 
who call themselves of the ton either lead, or hold cheap all others, is 
obtrusively evident: but how and by what art they attain such pre-eminence, 
they would be perplexed to explain. That some whim has happily called forth 
imitators; that some strange phrase has been adopted; that something odd in 
dress has become popular; that some beauty, or some deformity, no matter which, 
has found annotators; may commonly be traced as the origin of their first 
public notice. But to whichever of these accidents their early fame may be 
attributed, its establishment and its glory is built upon vanity that knows no 
deficiency, or insolence that knows no blush.

Notwithstanding her high superiority both in capacity and knowledge, Mrs. 
Arlbery felt piqued by this behaviour, though she laughed at herself for 
heeding it. 'Nevertheless,' cried she, 'those who shew contempt, even though 
themselves are the most contemptible, always seem on the higher ground. Yet 
'tis only, with regard to these animals of the ton, that nobody combats them. 
Their presumption is so notorious, that, either by disgust or alarm, it keeps 
off reprehension. Let anyone boldly, and face to face, venture to be more 
uncivil than themselves, and they would be overpowered at once. Their valour is 
no better than that of a barking cur, who affrights all that go on without 
looking at him, but who, the moment he is turned upon with a stamp and a fierce 
look, retreats himself, amazed, afraid, and ashamed.'

'If you, Mrs. Arlbery,' said the General, 'would undertake to tutor them, what 
good you might do!'

'O, Heavens, General, suspect me not of such reforming Quixotism! I have not 
the smallest desire to do them any good, believe me! If nature has given them 
no sense of propriety, why should I be more liberal? I only want to punish 
them; and that not, alas! from virtue, but from spite!'

The conversation of the two men of the ton with Camilla was soon over. It was 
made up of a few disjointed sentences, abusing Tunbridge, and praising the 
German Spa, in cant words, emphatically and conceitedly pronounced, and brought 
round upon every occasion, and in every speech, with so precise an exclusion of 
all other terms, that their vocabulary scarce consisted of forty words in 
totality.

Edgar occupied the space they vacated the moment of their departure; but not 
alone; Mrs. Mittin came into it with him, eager to tell Camilla how everybody 
had admired her turban; how sweetly she looked in it; how everybody said, they 
should not have known her again, it became her so; and how they all agreed her 
head had never been so well dressed before.

Edgar, when he could be heard, began speaking of Sir Sedley Clarendel; he felt 
miserable in what he thought her inconsiderate encouragement of such 
impertinence; and the delicacy which restrained him from expressing his opinion 
of the Major, had no weight with him here, as jealousy had no share in his 
dislike to the acquaintance: he believed the young Baronet incapable of all 
love but for himself, and a decidedly destined bachelor: without, therefore, 
the smallest hesitation, he plainly avowed that he had never met with a more 
thoroughly conceited fop, a more elaborate and self-sufficient coxcomb.

'You see him only,' said Camilla, 'with the impression made by his general 
appearance; and that is all against him: I always look for his better qualities 
and rejoice in finding them. His very sight fills me with grateful pleasure, by 
reminding me of the deliverance I owe to him.'

Edgar, amazed, intreated an explanation; and, when she had given it, struck and 
affected, clasped his hands, and exclaimed: 'How providential such a rescue! 
and how differently shall I henceforth behold him!' And, almost involuntarily 
turning to Mrs. Arlbery, he intreated to be presented to the young Baronet.

Sir Sedley received his overtures with some surprise, but great civility; and 
then went on with a ludicrous account he was giving to Lord Newford and Sir 
Theophilus, of the quarrel of Macdersey with Mr. Dubster.

'How awake thou art grown, Clary?' cried Sir Theophilus; 'A little while ago 
thou wast all hip and vapour; and now thou dost nothing but patronise fun.'

'Why, yes,' answered the Baronet, 'I begin to tire of ennui. 'Tis grown so 
common. I saw my footman beginning it but last week.'

'O, hang it! O, curse it!' cried Lord Newford, 'your footman!'

'Yes, the rogue is not without parts. I don't know if I shan't give him some 
lessons, upon leaving it off myself. The only difficulty is to find out what, 
in this nether world, to do without it. How can one fill up one's time? 
Stretching, yawning, and all that, are such delicious ingredients for coaxing 
on the lazy hours!'

'O, hang it, O, curse it,' cried Lord Newford; 'who can exist without them? I 
would not be bound to pass half an hour without yawning and stretching for the 
Mogul's empire. I'd rather snap short at once.'

'No, no, don't snap short yet, little Newy,' cried Sir Sedley. 'As to me, I am 
never at a loss for an expedient. I am not without some thoughts of falling in 
love.'

He looked at Edgar; who, not aware this was designed to catch his attention, 
naturally exclaimed: 'Thoughts! can you choose, or avoid at pleasure?'

'Most certainly. After four-and-twenty a man is seldom taken by surprise; at 
least, not till he is past forty: and then, the fear of being too late, 
sometimes renovates the eagerness of the first youth. But, in general, your 
willing slaves are boys.'

Edgar, laughing, begged a little information, how he meant to put his thoughts 
in execution.

'Nothing so facile! 'Tis but to look at some fair object attentively, to follow 
her with your eyes when she quits the room; never to let them rest without 
watching for her return; filling up the interval with a few sighs; to which, in 
a short time, you grow so habituated, that they become natural; and then, 
before you are aware, a certain solicitude and restlessness arise, which the 
connoisseurs in natural history dub falling in love.'

'These would be good hints,' said Edgar, 'to urge on waverers, who wish to 
persuade themselves to marry.'

'O no, my dear sir! no! that's a mistake of the first magnitude; no man is in 
love when he marries. He may have loved before; I have even heard he has 
sometimes loved after: but at the time never. There is something in the 
formalities of the matrimonial preparations that drive away all the little 
cupidons. They rarely stand even a demand of consentâ€”unless they doubt 
obtaining it; but a settlement! Parchments! Lawyers!â€”No! there is not a 
little Love in the Island of Cyprus, that is not ready to lend a wing to set 
passion, inspiration, and tenderness to flight, from such excruciating 
legalities.'

'Don't prose, Clary; don't prose,' cried Sir Theophilus, gaping till his mouth 
was almost distorted.

'O, killing! O, murder!' cried Lord Newford; 'what dost talk of marriage for?'

'It seems, then,' said Edgar, 'to be much the same thing what sort of wife 
falls to a man's lot; whether the woman of his choice, or a person he should 
blush to own?'

'Blush!' repeated Sir Sedley, smiling; 'no! no! A man of any fashion never 
blushes for his wife, whatever she may be. For his mistress, indeed, he may 
blush: for if there are any small failings there, his taste may be called in 
question.'

'Blush about a wife!' exclaimed Lord Newford; 'O, hang it! O, curse it! that's 
too bad!'

'Too bad, indeed,' cried Sir Theophilus; 'I can't possibly patronise blushing 
for a wife.'

''Tis the same, then, also,' said Edgar, 'how she turns out when the knot is 
tied, whether well or ill?'

'To exactitude! If he marry her for beauty, let her prove what she may, her 
face offers his apology. If for money, he needs none. But if, indeed, by some 
queer chance, he marries with a view of living with her, then, indeed, if his 
particularity gets wind, he may grow a little anxious for the acquittal of his 
oddity, in seeing her approved.'

'Approved! Ha! ha!' cried Lord Newford; 'a wife approved! That's too bad, 
Clary; that's too bad!'

'Poor Clary, what art prosing about?' cried Sir Theophilus. 'I can't possibly 
patronise this prosing.'

The entrance of the beautiful Mrs. Berlinton and her train now interrupted this 
conversation; the young Baronet immediately joined her; though not till he had 
given his hand to Edgar, in token of his willingness to cultivate his 
acquaintance.

Edgar, returning to Camilla, confessed he had too hastily judged Sir Sedley, 
when he concluded him a fool, as well as a fop; 'For,' added he, with a smile, 
'I see, now, one of those epithets is all he merits. He is certainly far from 
deficient in parts, though he abuses the good gifts of nature with such 
pedantry of affectation and conceit.'

Camilla was now intent to clear the history of the cotillon; when Mrs. 
Berlinton approaching, and, with graceful fondness, taking her hand, entreated 
to be indulged with her society: and, since she meant not to dance, for Edgar 
had not asked her, and the Major she had refused, she could not resist her 
invitation. She had lost her fear of displeasing Mrs. Arlbery by quitting her, 
from conceiving a still greater, of wearying by remaining with her.

Edgar, anxious both to understand and to discuss this new connexion, hovered 
about the party with unremitting vigilance. But, though he could not either 
look at or listen to Mrs. Berlinton, without admiring her, his admiration was 
neither free from censure of herself, nor terrour for her companion: he saw her 
far more beautiful than prudent, more amiable than dignified. The females in 
her group were few, and little worthy notice; the males appeared, to a man, 
without disguise, though not without restraint, her lovers. And though no one 
seemed selected, no one seemed despised; she appeared to admit their devoirs 
with little consideration; neither modestly retiring from power, nor vainly 
displaying it.

Camilla quitted not this enchantress till summoned by Mrs. Arlbery; who, seeing 
herself again, from the arrival of Lady Alithea Selmore, without any 
distinguished party, that lady drawing into her circle all people of any 
consequence not already attracted by Mrs. Berlinton, grew sick of the ball and 
the rooms, and impatient to return home. Camilla, in retiring, presented, 
folded in a paper, the guinea, half-guinea, and silver, she had borrowed of Sir 
Sedley; who received it without presuming at any contest; though not, after 
what he had heard from Mrs. Arlbery, without reluctance.

Edgar watched the instant when Camilla moved from the gay group; but Mrs. 
Mittin watched it also; and, approaching her more speedily, because with less 
embarrassment, seized her arm before he could reach her: and before he could, 
with any discretion, glide to her other side, Miss Dennel was there.

'Well now, young ladies,' said Mrs. Mittin, 'I'm going to tell you a secret. Do 
you know, for all I call myself Mrs. I'm single?'

'Dear, la!' exclaimed Miss Dennel; 'and for all you're so old!'

'So old, Miss! Who told you I was so old? I'm not so very old as you may think 
me. I'm no particular age, I assure you. Why, what made you think of that?'

'La, I don't know; only you don't look very young.'

'I can't help that, Miss Dennel. Perhaps you mayn't look young yourself one of 
these days. People can't always stand still just at a particular minute. Why, 
how old, now, do you take me to be? Come, be sincere.'

'La! I'm sure I can't tell; only I thought you was an old woman.'

'An old woman! Lord, my dear, people would laugh to hear you. You don't know 
what an old woman is. Why it's being a cripple, and blind, and deaf, and dumb, 
and slavering, and without a tooth. Pray, how am I like all that?'

'Nay, I'm sure I don't know; only I thought, by the look of your face, you must 
be monstrous old.'

'Lord, I can't think what you've got in your head, Miss Dennel! I never heard 
as much before, since I was born. Why the reason I'm called Mrs. is not because 
of that, I assure you; but because I'd a mind to be taken for a young widow, on 
account everybody likes a young widow; and if one is called Miss, people being 
so soon to think one an old maid, that it's quite disagreeable.'

This discourse brought them to the carriage.
