
A Summons to Happiness

Camilla had but just set out from Cleves, when Sir Hugh, consulting his 
weather-cocks, which a new chain of ideas had made him forget to examine, saw 
that the wind was fair for the voyage of his nephew; and heard, upon inquiry, 
that the favourable change had taken place the preceding day, though the 
general confusion of the house had prevented it from being heeded by any of the 
family.

With eagerness the most excessive, he went to the room of Eugenia, and bid her 
put on a smart hat to walk out with him, as there was no knowing how soon a 
certain person might arrive.

Eugenia, colouring, said she would rather stay within.

'Well,' cried he, 'you'll be neater, to be sure, for not blowing about in the 
wind; so I'll go take t'other girls.'

Eugenia, left alone, became exceedingly fluttered. She could not bear to remain 
in the house under the notion of so degrading a consideration as owing any 
advantage to outward appearance; and fearing her uncle, in his extreme 
openness, should give that reason for her not walking, she determined to take a 
stroll by herself in the park.

She bent her steps towards a small wood at some distance from the house, where 
she meant to rest herself and read; for she had learnt of Dr. Orkborne never to 
be unprovided with a book. But she had not yet reached her place of intended 
repose, when the sound of feet made her turn round, and, to her utter 
consternation, she saw a young man, whose boots, whip, and foreign air, 
announced instantly to be Clermont Lynmere.

She doubted not but he was sent in pursuit of her; and though youthful timidity 
prompted her to shun him, she retained sufficient command over herself to check 
it, and to stop till he came up to her; while he, neither quickening nor 
slackening his pace as he approached, passed her with so little attention, that 
she was presently convinced he had scarce even perceived her.

Disconcerted by a meeting so strange and so ill timed, she involuntarily stood 
still, without any other power than that of looking after him.

In a few minutes Molly Mill, running up to her, cried: 'Dear Miss, have not you 
seen young Mr. Lynmere? He come by t'other way just as master, and Miss 
Margland, and Miss Lynmere, and Miss Tyrold, was gone to meet him by the great 
gate; and so he said he'd come and look who he could find himself.'

Eugenia had merely voice to order her back. The notion of having a figure so 
insignificant as to be passed, without even exciting a doubt [who] she might 
be, was cruelly mortifying. She knew not how to return to the house, and relate 
such an incident. She sat down under a tree to recollect herself.

Presently, however, she saw the stranger turn quick about, and before she could 
rise, slightly touching his hat, without looking at her: 'Pray, ma'am,' he 
said, 'do you belong to that house?' pointing to the mansion of Sir Hugh.

Faintly she answered, 'Yes, sir;' and he then added: 'I am just arrived, and in 
search of Sir Hugh and the young ladies; one of them, they told me, was this 
way; but I can trace nobody. Have you seen any of them?'

More and more confounded, she could make no reply. Inattentive to her 
embarrassment, and still looking every way around, he repeated his question. 
She then pointed towards the great gate, stammering she believed they went that 
way. 'Thank you;' he answered, with a nod, and then hurried off.

She now thought no more of moving nor of rising; she felt a kind of stupor, in 
which, fixed, and without reflection, she remained, till, startled by the sound 
of her uncle's voice, she got up, made what haste she was able to the house by 
a private path, and ascended to her own room by a back stair case.

That an interview to which she had so long looked forward, for which, with 
unwearied assiduity, she had so many years laboured to prepare herself, and 
which was the declared precursor of the most important Ã¦ra of her life, should 
pass over so abruptly, and be circumstanced so aukwardly, equally dispirited 
and confused her.

In a few minutes, Molly Mill, entering, said: 'They're all come back, and Sir 
Hugh's fit to eat the young squire up; and no wonder, for he's a sweet proper 
gentleman, as ever I see. Come, miss, I hope you'll put on something else, for 
that hat makes you look worse than any thing. I would not have the young squire 
see you such a figure for never so much.'

The artlessness of unadorned truth, however sure in theory of extorting 
administration, rarely, in practice, fails inflicting pain or mortification. 
The simple honesty of Molly redoubled the chagrin of her young mistress, who, 
sending her away, went anxiously to the looking-glass, whence, in a few 
moments, she perceived her uncle, from the window, laughing, and making 
significant signs to some one out of her sight. Extremely ashamed to be so 
surprised, she retreated to the other end of the room, though not till she had 
heard Sir Hugh say: 'Ay, ay, she's getting ready for you; I told you why she 
would not walk out with us, so don't let's hurry her, though I can't but 
commend your being a little impatient, which I dare say so is she, only young 
girls can't so well talk about it.'

Eugenia now found that Clermont had no suspicion he had seen her. Sir Hugh 
concluded she had not left her room, and asked no questions that could lead to 
the discovery.

Presently the baronet came up stairs himself, and tapping at her door, said: 
'Come, my dear, don't be too curious, the breakfast having been spoilt this 
hour already; besides your cousin's having nothing on himself but his riding 
dress.'

Happy she could at least clear herself from so derogatory a design, she opened 
her door. Sir Hugh, surveying her with a look of surprise and vexation, 
exclaimed: 'What my dear! an't you dizen'd yet? why I thought to have seen you 
in all your best things!'

'No, sir,' answered she calmly; 'I shall not dress till dinner-time.'

'My dear girl,' cried he, kindly, though a little distressed how to explain 
himself; 'there's no need you should look worse than you can help; though you 
can do better things, I know, than looking well at any time; only what I mean 
is, you should let him see you to the best advantage at the first, for fear of 
his taking any dislike before he knows about Dr. Orkborne, and that.'

'Dislike, sir!' repeated she, extremely hurt; 'if you think he will take any 
dislike ... I had better not see him at all!'

'My dear girl, you quite mistake me, owing to my poor head's always using the 
wrong word; which is a remarkable thing that I can't help. But I don't mean in 
the least to doubt his being pleased with you, except only at the beginning, 
from not being used to you; for as to all your studies, there's no more Greek 
and Latin in one body's face than in another's; but, however, if you won't 
dress, there's no need to keep the poor boy in hot water for nothing.'

He then took her hand, and rather dragged than drew her down stairs, saying as 
they went: 'I must wish you joy, though, for I assure you he's a very fine lad, 
and hardly a bit of a coxcomb.'

The family was all assembled in the parlour, except Camilla, for whom the 
baronet had instantly dispatched Edgar, and Mr. Tyrold, who was not yet 
returned from a morning ride, but for whom Sir Hugh had ordered the great 
dinner bell to be rung, as a signal of something extraordinary.

Young Lynmere was waiting the arrival of Eugenia with avowed and unbridled 
impatience. Far from surmising it was her he had met in the park, he had 
concluded it was one of the maids, and thought of her no more. He asked a 
thousand questions in a breath when his uncle was gone. Was she tall? was she 
short? was she plump? was she lean? was she fair? was she brown? was she 
florid? was she pale? But as he asked them of every body, nobody answered; yet 
all were in some dismay at a curiosity implying such entire ignorance, except 
Indiana, who could not, without simpering, foresee the amazement of her brother 
at her cousin's person and appearance.

'Here's a noble girl for you!' cried Sir Hugh, opening the door with a 
flourish; 'for all she's got so many best things, she's come down in her worst, 
for the sake of looking ill at the beginning, to the end that there may be no 
fault to be found afterwards; which is the wiseness that does honour to her 
education.'

This was, perhaps, the first time an harangue from the baronet had been thought 
too short; but the surprise of young Lynmere, at the view of his destined 
bride, made him wish he would speak on, merely to annul any necessity for 
speaking himself. Eugenia aimed in vain to recover the calmness of her nature, 
or to borrow what might resemble it from her notions of female dignity. The 
injudicious speech of Sir Hugh, but publicly forcing upon the whole party the 
settled purpose of the interview, covered her with blushes, and gave a tremor 
to her frame that obliged her precipitately to seat herself, while her joined 
hands supplicated his silence.

'Well, my dear, well!' said he, kissing her, 'don't let me vex you; what I said 
having no meaning, except for the best; though your cousin might as well have 
saluted you before you sat down, I think; which, however, I suppose may be out 
of fashion now, every thing changing since my time; which, Lord help me! it 
will take me long enough to learn.'

Lynmere noticed not this hint, and they all seated themselves round the 
breakfast table; Sir Hugh scarce able to refrain from crying for joy, and 
continually exclaiming: 'This is the happiest day of all my life, for all I've 
lived so long! To see us all together, at last, and my dear boy come home to 
his native old England!'

Miss Margland made the tea, and young Lynmere instantly and almost voraciously 
began eating of every thing that was upon the table. Indiana, when she saw her 
brother as handsome as her cousin was deformed, thought the contrast so droll, 
she could look at neither without tittering; Lavinia observed, with extreme 
concern, the visible distress of her sister; Dr. Orkborne forbore to ruminate 
upon his work, in expectation, every moment, of being called upon to converse 
with the learned young traveller; but Sir Hugh alone spoke, though his delight 
and his loquacity joined to his pleasure in remarking the good old English 
appetite which his nephew had brought with him from foreign parts, prevented 
his being struck with the general taciturnity.

The entrance of Mr. Tyrold proved a relief to all the party, though a pain to 
himself. He suffered in seeing the distressed confusion of Eugenia, and felt 
something little short of indignation at the supercilious air with which 
Clermont seemed to examine her; holding his head high and back, as if measuring 
his superior height, while every line round his mouth marked that ridicule was 
but suppressed by contempt.

When Sir Hugh, at length, observed that the young traveller uttered not a 
syllable, he exclaimed: 'Lord help us! what fools it makes of us, being 
overjoyed! here am I talking all the talk to myself, while my young scholar 
says nothing! which I take to be owing to my speaking only English; which, 
however, I should not do, if it was not for the misfortune of knowing no other, 
which I can't properly call a fault, being out of no idleness, as that 
gentleman can witness for me; for I'll warrant nobody's taken more pains; but 
our heads won't always do what we want.'

He then gave a long and melancholy detail of his studies and their failure.

When the carriage arrived with Camilla, young Lynmere loitered to a window, to 
look at it; Eugenia arose, meaning to seize the opportunity to escape to her 
room; but seeing him turn round upon her moving, she again sat down, 
experiencing, for the first time, a sensation of shame for her lameness, which, 
hitherto, she had regularly borne with fortitude, when she had not forgotten 
from indifference: neither did she feel spirits to exhibit, again, before his 
tall and strikingly elegant figure, her diminutive little person.

Camilla entered with traces of a disordered mind too strongly marked in her 
countenance to have escaped observation, had she been looked at with any 
attention. But Eugenia and Lynmere ingrossed all eyes and all thoughts. Even 
herself, at first sight of the husband elect of her sister, lost, for a moment, 
all personal consideration, and looked at him only with the interesting idea of 
the future fate of Eugenia. But it was only for a moment; when she turned 
round, and saw nothing of Edgar, when her uncle's inquiry what had become of 
him convinced her he was gone elsewhere, her heart sunk, she felt sick, and 
would have glided out of the room, had not Sir Hugh, thinking her faint for 
want of her breakfast, begged Miss Margland to make her some fresh tea; adding, 
'As this is a day in which I intend us all to be happy alike, I beg nobody will 
go out of the room, for the sake of our enjoying it all together.'

This summons to happiness produced the usual effect of such calls; a general 
silence, succeeded by a general yawning, and a universal secret wish of 
separation, to the single exception of Sir Hugh, who, after a pause, said, 'Why 
nobody speaks but me! which I really think odd enough. However, my dear nephew, 
if you don't care for our plain English conversation, which, indeed, after all 
your studies, one can't much wonder at, nobody can be against you and the 
Doctor jabbering together a little of your Greek and Latin.'

Lynmere, letting fall his bread upon the table, leaned back in his chair, and, 
sticking his hands in his side, looked at his uncle with an air of astonishment.

'Nay,' continued the baronet, 'I don't pretend I should be much the wiser for 
it; however, it's what I've no objection to hear: so come, Doctor! you're the 
oldest; break the ice!'

A verse of Horace with which Dr. Orkborne was opening his answer, was stopt 
short, by the eager manner in which Lynmere re-seized his bread with one hand, 
while, with the other, to the great discomposure of the exact Miss Margland, he 
stretched forth for the tea-pot, to pour out a bason of tea; not ceasing the 
libation till the saucer itself, overcharged, sent his beverage in trickling 
rills from the tablecloth to the floor.

The ladies all moved some paces from the table, to save their clothes; and Miss 
Margland reproachfully inquired if she had not made his tea to his liking.

'Don't mind it, I beg, my dear boy,' cried Sir Hugh; 'a little slop's soon 
wiped up; and we're all friends: so don't let that stop your Latin.'

Lynmere, noticing neither the Latin, the mischief, nor the consolation, 
finished his tea in one draught, and then said: 'Pray, sir, where do you keep 
all your newspapers?'

'Newspapers, my dear nephew? I've got no newspapers: what would you have us do 
with a mere set of politics, that not one of us understand, in point of what 
may be their true drift; now we're all met together o'purpose to be 
comfortable?'

'No newspapers, sir?' cried Lynmere, rising, and vehemently ringing the bell; 
and, with a scornful laugh, adding, half between his teeth, 'Ha! ha! live in 
the country without newspapers! a good joke, faith!'

A servant appearing, he gave orders for all the morning papers that could be 
procured.

Sir Hugh looked much amazed; but presently, starting up, said, 'My dear nephew, 
I believe I've caught your meaning, at last; for if you mean, as I take for 
granted, that we're all rather dull company, why I'll take your hint, and leave 
you and a certain person together, to make a better acquaintance; which you 
can't do so well while we're all by, on account of modesty.'

Eugenia, frightened almost to sickness, [was] caught by her two sisters; and 
Mr. Tyrold, tenderly compassionating her apprehensions, whispered to Sir Hugh 
to dispense with a tÃªte-Ã -tÃªte so early: and, taking her hand, accompanied 
her himself to her room, composing, and re-assuring her by the way.

Sir Hugh, though vexed, then followed, to issue some particular orders; the 
rest of the party dispersed, and young Lynmere remained with his sister.

Walking on tiptoe to the door, he shut it, and put his ear to the key-hole, 
till he no longer heard any footstep. Turning then hastily round, he flung 
himself, full length, upon a sofa, and burst into so violent a fit of laughter, 
he was forced to hold his sides.

Indiana, tittering, said, 'Well, brother, how do you like her?'

'Like her!' he repeated, when able to speak; 'why the old gentleman doats! He 
can never, else, seriously suppose I'll marry her.'

'He! he! he! yes, but he does, indeed, brother. He's got every thing ready.'

'Has he, faith?' cried Lynmere, again rolling on the sofa, almost suffocated 
with violent laughter: from which, suddenly recovering, he started up to stroam 
to a large looking-glass, and, standing before it, in an easy and most assured 
attitude, 'Much obliged to him, 'pon honour!' he exclaimed: 'Don't you think,' 
turning carelessly, yet in an elegant position, round to his sister, 'don't you 
think I am, Indiana?'

'Me, brother? la! I'm sure I think she's the ugliest little fright, poor thing! 
I ever saw in the world, poor thing! such a little, short, dumpty, hump backed, 
crooked, limping figure of a fright ... poor thing!'

'Yes, yes,' cried he, changing his posture, but still undauntedly examining 
himself before the glass, 'he has taken amazing care of me, I confess; matched 
me most exactly!'

Then sitting down, as if to consider the matter more seriously, he took Indiana 
by the arm, and, with some displeasure, said, 'Why, what does the old quoz 
mean? Does he want me to toss him in a blanket?'

Indiana tittered more than ever at this idea, till her brother angrily demanded 
of her, why she had not written herself some description of this young Hecate, 
to prepare him for her sight? Sir Hugh having merely given him to understand 
that she was not quite beautiful.

Indiana had no excuse to plead, but that she did not think of it. She had, 
indeed, grown up with an aversion to writing, in common with whatever else gave 
trouble, or required attention; and her correspondence with her brother rarely 
produced more than two letters in a year, which were briefly upon general 
topics, and read by the whole family.

She now related to him the history of the will, and the vow, which only in an 
imperfect, and but half-credited manner had reached him.

His laughter than gave place to a storm of rage. He called himself ruined, 
blasted, undone; and abused Sir Hugh as a good-for-nothing dotard, defrauding 
him of his just rights and expectations.

'Why, that's the reason,' said Indiana, 'he wants to marry you to cousin 
Eugenia; because, he says, it's to make you amends.'

This led him to a rather more serious consideration of the affair; for, he 
protested, the money was what he could not do without. Yet, again parading to 
the glass, 'What a shame, Indiana,' he cried, 'what a shame would it be to make 
such a sacrifice? If he'll only pay a trifle of money for me, and give me a few 
odd hundreds to begin with, I'll hold him quit of all else, so he'll but quit 
me of that wizen little stump.'

A newspaper, procured from the nearest public house, being now brought, he 
pinched Indiana by the chin, said she was the finest girl he had seen in 
England, and whistled off to his appointed chamber.

Clermont Lynmere so entirely resembled his sister in person, that now, in his 
first youth, he might almost have been taken for her, even without change of 
dress: but the effect produced upon the beholders bore not the same parallel: 
what in her was beauty in its highest delicacy, in him seemed effeminacy in its 
lowest degradation. The brilliant fairness of his forehead, the transparent 
pink of his cheeks, the pouting vermillion of his lips, the liquid lustre of 
his languishing blue eyes, the minute form of his almost infantine mouth, and 
the snowy whiteness of his small hands and taper fingers, far from bearing the 
attraction which, in his sister, rendered them so lovely, made him considered 
by his own sex as an unmanly fop, and by the women, as too conceited to admire 
any thing but himself.

With respect to his understanding, his superiority over his sister was rather 
in education than in parts, and in practical intercourse with the world, than 
in any higher reasoning faculties. His character, like his person, wanted 
maturing, the one being as distinct from intellectual decision, as the other 
from masculine dignity. He had youth without diffidence, sprightliness without 
wit, opinion without judgment, and learning without knowledge. Yet, as he 
contemplated his fine person in the glass, he thought himself without one 
external fault; and, early cast upon his own responsibility, was not conscious 
of one mental deficiency.
