
An Author's Time-keeper

Mr. Westwyn, charmed to meet so many near relations of a long-valued friend, 
struck by the extraordinary beauty of Indiana, and by the sensible answers of 
the child, as he called Eugenia; as well as caught by the united loveliness of 
person and of mind which he observed in Camilla, could not bring himself to 
retire till the dinner was upon the table: pleading, in excuse for his stay, 
his former intimacy with Sir Hugh. Miss Margland, seeing in him nothing that 
marked fashion, strove to distance him by a high demeanour: but though not 
wanting in shrewdness, Mr. Westwyn was a perfectly natural man, and only 
thinking her manners disagreeable, without suspecting her intention, took but 
little notice of her, from the time he saw she could give him no pleasure: 
while with the young party, he was so much delighted, that he seriously 
regretted he had only one son to offer amongst them.

When the dinner was served, Eugenia grew uneasy that Dr. Orkborne should be 
summoned, whose non-appearance she had not ventured to mention, from the 
professed hatred of his very sight avowed by Miss Margland. But Camilla, 
brought up to exert constantly her courage for the absent, told the waiter to 
call the gentleman from the head of the stairs.

'My master himself, ma'am,' he answered, 'as well as me, both told the 
gentleman the company he came with were served; but he as good as bid us both 
hold our tongues. He seems to have taken a great liking to that place upon the 
stairs; though there's nothing I know of particular in it.'

'But, if you tell him we wait dinnerâ€”' cried Eugenia; when Miss Margland, 
interrupting her said, 'I'm sure, then, you won't tell him true: for I beg we 
may all begin. I think it would be rather more decorous he should wait for us!'

The waiter, nevertheless, went; but presently returned, somewhat ruffled; 
saying, 'The gentleman does not choose to hear me, ma'am. He says, if he mayn't 
be let alone one single minute, it will be throwing away all his morning. I 
can't say I know what he means; but he speaks rather froppish. I'd as lieve not 
go to him again, if you please.'

Miss Margland declared, she wished him no better dinner than his pot-hooks; but 
did not doubt he would come just before they had done, as usual; and he was no 
more mentioned: though she never in her life eat so fast; and the table was 
ordered to be cleared of its covers, with a speed exactly the reverse of the 
patience with which the Doctor was indulged on similar occasions by the baronet.

Miss Margland, when the cloth was removed, proposed a sally in search of 
lodgings. Camilla and Eugenia, desirous of a private conference, begged to 
remain within; though the latter sought to take care of her absent preceptor, 
before she could enjoy the conversation of her sister; and when Miss Margland 
and Indiana, in secret exultation at his dinnerless state, had glided, with 
silent simpering, past him, flew to beseech his consent to take some 
nourishment.

Such, however, was his present absorption in what he was writing, that the 
voluntary kindness of his pupil was as unwelcome as the forced intrusion of the 
waiter; and he conjured her to grant him a little respite from such eternal 
tormenting, with the plaintive impatience of deprecating some injury.

The sisters, now, equally eager to relate and to listen to their mutual 
affairs, shut themselves up in the apartment of Eugenia; who, with the greatest 
simplicity, began the discourse, by saying, 'Have you heard, my dear sister, 
that Clermont has refused me?'

Camilla was severely shocked. Accustomed herself to the face and form of 
Eugenia, which, to her innocent affection, presented always the image of her 
virtuous mind and cultivated understanding, she had not presaged even the 
possibility of such an event; and, though she had seen with concern the 
inequality of their outward appearance, Clermont had seemed to her, in all 
else, so inferior to her sister, that she had repined at his unworthiness, but 
never doubted the alliance.

She was distressed how to offer any consolation; but soon found none was 
required. Eugenia was composed and contented, though pensive, and not without 
some feeling of mortification. Yet anger and resentment had found no place in 
the transaction. Her equity acknowledged that Clermont had every right of 
choice: but while her candour induced her to even applaud his disinterestedness 
in relinquishing the Cleves estate, her capacity pointed out how terrible must 
be the personal defects, that so speedily, without one word of conversation, 
one trial of any sort how their tastes, tempers, or characters might accord, 
stimulated him to so decisive a rejection. This view of her unfortunate 
appearance cast her, at first, into a train of melancholy ideas, that would 
fast have led her to unhappiness, though wholly unmixed with any regret of 
Clermont, had not the natural philosophy of her mind come to her aid; or had 
her education been of a more worldly sort.

When Camilla related her own history, her plan of making Edgar again completely 
master of his own proceedings met the entire approbation of Eugenia, who, with 
a serious smile, said, 'Take warning by me, my dear sister! and, little as you 
have reason to be brought into any comparison with such a one as me, anticipate 
the disgrace of defection!'

Camilla, much touched, embraced her, sincerely wishing she were half as 
faultless as her excellent self.

The return of Miss Margland and Indiana obliged them to quit their retreat; and 
they now found Dr. Orkborne in the dining-room. Having finished his paragraph, 
he had sought his party of his own accord; but, meeting with no one, had taken 
a book from his pocket, with which he meant to beguile the appetite he felt 
rising, till the hour of dinner, which he had not the smallest suspicion was 
over; for of the progress of time he had no knowledge but by its palpable 
passage from the sun to the moon; his watch was never wound up, and the morning 
and the evening were but announced to him by a summons to breakfast and to 
supper.

The ladies seated themselves at the window. Indiana was enchanted by the 
concourse of gay and well-dressed people passing by, and far from insensible to 
the visible surprise and pleasure she excited in those who cast up their eyes 
at the hotel. Eugenia, to whom a great and populous town was entirely new, 
found also, in the diversity as well as novelty of its objects, much matter for 
remark and contemplation; Miss Margland experienced the utmost satisfaction in 
seeing, at last, some faces and some things less rustic than had been presented 
to her in Yorkshire or at Cleves; and Camilla had every hope that this place, 
in Edgar's own expression, would terminate every perplexity, and give local 
date to her life's permanent felicity.

In a few minutes, a youth appeared on the opposite pavement, whose air was new 
to none of the party, yet not immediately recollected by any. It was striking, 
however, in elegance and in melancholy. Eugenia recollected him first, and 
starting back, gasped for breath; Indiana the next moment called out, 'Ah!... 
it's Mr. Melmond!' and blushing high, her whole face was bright and dimpled 
with unexpected delight.

He walked on, without looking up, and Indiana, simply piqued as well as 
chagrined, said she was glad he was gone.

But Eugenia looked after him with a gentle sigh, which now first she thought 
blameless, and a pleasure, which, though half mournful, she now suffered 
herself to encourage. Free from all ties that made her shun this partiality as 
culpable, she secretly told herself she might now, without injury to any one, 
indulge it for an object [whom,] little as he was known to her, she internally 
painted with all the faultless qualities of ideal excellence.

From these meditations she was roused by Dr. Orkborne's looking rather 
wishfully round him, and exclaiming, 'Pray ... don't we dine rather late?'

The mistake being cleared up, by Miss Margland's assuring him it was impossible 
to keep dinner waiting all day, for people who chose to stand whole hours upon 
a staircase, he felt rather discomforted: but when Eugenia privately ordered 
him a repast in his own chamber, he was amply consoled, by the unconstrained 
freedom with which he was empowered to have more books upon the table than 
plates; and to make more ink spots than he eat mouthfuls.

Camilla had the mortification to find, upon her return home, that Edgar had 
made his promised visit, not only in her absence, but while Mrs. Berlinton was 
still with her aunt.

The lady then communicated to Camilla the secret to which, while yet in 
ignorance of its existence, she now found she had been sacrificed. Mrs. Ecton, 
two years ago, had given her hand, in the most solemn privacy, to her butler, 
who now attended her to Southampton. To avoid disobliging a sick old relation, 
from whom she expected a considerable legacy, she had prevailed with her 
husband to consent that the marriage should not be divulged: but certain that 
whatever now might be her fortune, she had no power to bequeath it from her new 
connexion, the terror of leaving utterly destitute a beautiful young creature, 
who believed herself well provided for, had induced her to nearly force her 
acceptance of an almost superannuated old man of family; who, merely coveting 
her beauty, inquired not into her inclination. The same latent cause had made 
her inexorable to the pleadings of young Melmond; who, conceiving his fortune 
dependent upon the pleasure of his aunt, his certain income being trifling, 
thought it his duty to fly the fair object of his adoration, when he discovered 
the deceit of Lionel with regard to the inheritance of Sir Hugh. This sick old 
relation was now just dead, and had left to her sole disposal a considerable 
estate. The husband naturally refused to be kept any longer from his just 
rights; but the shame she felt of making the discovery of a marriage contracted 
clandestinely, after she was sixty years of age, with a man under thirty, threw 
her into a nervous fever. And, in this state, unable to reveal to her nephew an 
event which now affected him alone, she prevailed with Mr. Ulst, who was 
willing to revisit his original home, Southampton, to accompany her thither in 
his usual capacity, till she had summoned her nephew and niece, and acquainted 
them with the affair.

To herself, Mrs. Berlinton said, the evil of this transaction had been over, 
while yet it was unknown; she had heard it, therefore, in silence, and forborne 
unavailing reproach. But her brother, to whom the blow was new, and the 
consequences were still impending, was struck with extreme anguish, that while 
thus every possible hope was extinguished with regard to his love, he must 
suddenly apply himself to some business, or be reduced to the most obscure 
poverty.

Camilla heard the account with sincere concern for them both, much heightened 
for young Melmond, upon finding that, by his express desire, his sister now 
relinquished her design of cultivating an acquaintance with Indiana, whom he 
had the virtue to determine to avoid, since his fortune, and even his hopes, 
were thus irretrievably ruined.

They conversed together to a late hour; and Camilla, before they parted, made 
the most earnest apologies for the liberty taken with her house by Mrs. Mittin: 
but Mrs. Berlinton, with the utmost sweetness, begged she might stay till all 
her business with her was settled; smilingly adding, business alone, she was 
sure could bring them together.

Much relieved, she then determined to press Mrs. Mittin to collect and pay her 
accounts immediately; and to avoid with her, in the meanwhile, any further 
transactions.
