
An agreeable Hearing

Early the next morning, Camilla went to the hotel, in the carriage of Mrs. 
Berlinton; eluding, though not without difficulty, the company of Mrs. Mittin. 
She found the party all in good spirits; Indiana, in particular, was completely 
elated; joined to the admiration she believed awaiting her in this large and 
fashionable town, she now knew she might meet there the only person who had 
ever excited in her youthful, and nearly vacant breast, any appropriate 
pleasure, super-added to the general zest of being adored. She did not, indeed, 
think of marrying any one who could not offer her a coach and four; but so 
little was she disturbed by thinking at all, that the delight of being adulated 
by the man she preferred, carried with it no idea of danger. Eugenia too, 
soothed with the delusions of her romantic but innocent fancy, flattered 
herself she might now see continually the object she conceived formed for 
meriting her ever reverential regard; and Miss Margland was importantly 
occupied upon affairs best suited to her taste and ancient habits, in 
deliberating how first to bring forth her fair charge with the most brilliant 
effect.

Camilla was much embarrassed how to parry an introduction to Mrs. Berlinton, 
upon which all the females built as the foundation of their Southampton 
prosperity; the young ones, already informed she was the sister of Melmond, 
languishing to know her for his sake; and Miss Margland, formerly acquainted 
with the noble family of her husband, being impatient to resume her claims in 
similar circles; but an awkward beginning apology was set aside by the entrance 
of Edgar and Dr. Marchmont.

Indiana now poured forth innumerable questions upon what she might look forward 
to with respect to balls and public places; Eugenia asked nearly as many 
concerning the buildings, antiquities, and prospects; and Miss Margland more 
than either, relative to the company, their genealogies and connexions. The two 
Doctors soon sat aloof, conferring upon less familiar matters; but Edgar only 
spoke in reply, and Camilla uttered not a word.

Soon after, a voice on the stairs called out, 'O never mind shewing me the way; 
if I come to a wrong room, I'll go on till I come to a right;' and the next 
minute young Lynmere sallied into the apartment.

'I could not get to you last night,' cried he; 'and I can only stay a moment 
now. I have a pretty serious business upon my hands; so if you can give me any 
breakfast, don't lose time.'

Miss Margland, willing to please the brother of Indiana, readily ordered for 
him whatever the inn would afford, of which he failed not heartily to partake, 
saying, 'I have met with a good comic sort of adventure here already. Guess 
what it is?'

Indiana complied; but his own wish to communicate was so much stronger than 
that of anyone to hear, that, before she could pronounce three words, he cried: 
'Well, if you're so excessive curious, I'll tell it you. I'm engaged in a duel.'

Indiana screamed; Miss Margland echoed her cry; Eugenia, who had looked down 
from his entrance, raised her eyes with an air of interest; Camilla was 
surprised out of her own concerns; and Edgar surveyed him with an astonishment 
not wholly unmixt with contempt; but the two Doctors went on with their own 
discourse.

'Nay, nay, Dye, don't be frightened; 'tis not a duel in which I am to fight 
myself; I am only to be second. But suppose I were first? what signifies? these 
are things we have in hand so often, we don't think of them.'

'La! brother! you don't say so?' cried Indiana: 'La! how droll!' He then 
pretended that he would tell nothing more.

Camilla inquired if he had seen Mr. Westwyn, whom she had met with the 
preceding day.

'Not I, faith! but that's apropos enough; for it's his son that has asked me to 
be his second.'

'O, poor good old Mr. Westwyn!' cried Camilla, now much interested in this 
history; 'and can you not save him such a shock? can you not be mediator 
instead of second? he seems so fond of his son....'

'O, as to him, it's no matter; he's such a harsh old hunks, I shall be glad to 
have him worked a little; I've often wanted to pull him by the nose, myself, he 
takes such liberties with me. But did you ever hear of such a fool as his son? 
he deserves to be badgered as bad as his father; he's going to fight with as 
fine an honest fellow as ever I met with, for nothing at all! absolutely 
nothing!'

'Dear! how droll!' said Indiana.

'But why can you not interfere?' cried Camilla: 'poor Mr. Westwyn will be made 
so unhappy if any evil befalls his son!'

'O, faith, as to him, he may take it as he will; I shan't trouble my head about 
him; he has made free enough with me, I can assure you; it's only to have him 
out of the way, that the business is put off till noon; it was to have been in 
the morning, but the old tyrant took it into his pate to make poor Henry, who 
is one of your good ones, and does nothing to vex him on purpose, ride out with 
him; he has promised, however, to get off by twelve o'clock, when four of us 
are to be at a certain spot that I shan't name.'

Camilla again began to plead the merits of the father; but Indiana more 
urgently demanded the reason of the combat. 'I dare say, brother, they fight 
about being in love with somebody? don't they, brother? now do tell me?'

'Not a whit! it's for a girl he don't care a straw for, and never saw but once 
in his life, and don't care a farthing if he never sees again.'

'Dear, how droll, brother! I thought people always fought about being in love 
with somebody they wanted to marry; and never but when she was excessive 
pretty.'

'O, faith, marriage seldom deserves a fighting match; but as to being pretty, 
that's all Harry has in his excuse, so he pretends she's as divine as an angel.'

'Dear! well, and don't you know anything more than that about it?'

'No, nor he neither; he only saw her at a bathing house, where a fine jolly 
young buck was paying her a few compliments, that she affected not to like; and 
presently, in a silly dispute whether she was a girl of character, they had a 
violent quarrel, and Harry was such a fool as to end it with a challenge.'

At the words a bathing house, the blood forsook the cheeks of Camilla with 
sudden personal alarm; but it mounted high into them again, upon hearing the 
nature of the dispute; though yet again it sunk, and left them wholly pallid, 
at the brief and final conviction she was the sole cause of this duel, and upon 
so disgraceful a dispute.

The emotions of Edgar, though less fearful, were not less violent nor painful. 
That Camilla should be the subject of any challenge was shocking, but of such a 
one he thought a dishonour; yet to prevent, and with the least publicity, its 
effect, was the immediate occupation of his mind.

A short pause ensued, broken presently by Clermont, who, looking at his watch, 
suddenly jumped up, and calling out, 'Faith, I shall be too late!' was capering 
out of the room; but the shame of Camilla in the disgrace, was overpowered by 
her terror of its consequences, and starting up, and clasping her hands, 'O 
cousin! O Clermont!' she cried, 'for Heaven's sake stop this affair!'

Clermont, satisfied that a sufficient alarm was raised to impede the 
transaction, without any concession on his part, declared himself bound in 
honour to attend the appointment, and, in extreme seeming haste and 
earnestness, walked off; stopping, however, when he came to the door, not to 
listen to the supplications of his cousin, but to toss off a fresh cup of 
chocolate, which a waiter was just carrying to the next room.

Camilla now, her face varying in colour twenty times in a minute, and her whole 
frame shaking, while her eyes were cast, conscious and timid, on the floor, 
approached Edgar, and saying, 'This young man's father is my dear uncle's 
friend!...' burst into tears.

Edgar, wholly dissolved, took her hand, pressed it to his lips, besought her, 
in a low voice, to dismiss her apprehensions, in the confidence of his most 
ardent exertions, and again kissing her hand, with the words, 'Too ... O, far 
too dear Camilla!' hastened after Lynmere.

Affected in a thousand ways, she dropt, weeping, upon a chair. Should the duel 
take place, and any fatal consequences follow, she felt she should never be 
happy again; and even, should it be prevented, its very suggestion, from so 
horrible a doubt of her character, seemed a stain from which it could never 
recover. The inconsiderate facility with which she had wandered about with a 
person so little known to her, so underbred, and so forward, appeared now to 
herself inexcusable; and she determined, if but spared this dreadful 
punishment, to pass the whole of her future life in unremitting caution.

Eugenia, with the kindest sympathy, and Indiana and Miss Margland, with extreme 
curiosity, sought to discover the reason of her emotion; but while begging them 
to dispense with an explanation, old Mr. Westwyn was announced and appeared.

The horrors of a culprit, the most cruel as well as criminal, seemed instantly 
the portion of the self-condemned Camilla; and, as he advanced with cheerful 
kindness, to inquire after her health, his ignorance that all his happiness, 
through her means, was that moment at stake, pierced her with a suffering so 
exquisite, that she uttered a deep groan, and sunk back upon her chair.

An instant's recollection brought her more of fortitude, though not of comfort; 
and springing up and addressing, though not looking at Mr. Westwyn, who was 
staring at her with astonishment and concern: 'Where, sir,' she cried, 'is your 
son? If you have the least knowledge which way he is gone ... which way he may 
be traced ... pursue and force him back this moment!... Immediately!...'

'My son!' repeated the good old gentleman, wanting no other word to participate 
in any alarm; 'what, Hal Westwyn?â€”'

'Follow him ... seek him ... send for him ... and do not, a single instant, 
lose sight of him all day!'

'My dear young lady, what do you mean? I'll send for him, to be sure, if you 
desire it; but what makes you so good as to think about my son? did you ever 
see my son? do you know my son? do you know Hal Westwyn?'

'Don't ask now, dear sir! secure him first, and make what inquiries you please 
afterwards.'

Mr. Westwyn, in evident consternation, walked out, Camilla herself opening the 
door; but turning back in the passage, strongly said: 'If the boy has been 
guilty of any misbehaviour, I won't support him; I don't like misbehaviour; 
it's a bad thing; I can't take to it.'

'O no! no! quite the contrary!' exclaimed the agitated Camilla, 'he is good, 
kind, generous! I owe him the greatest obligation! and I desire nothing upon 
earth so much, at this moment, as to see him, and to thank him!'

The old gentleman's eyes now filled with tears, and coming back, and most 
affectionately shaking hands with her, 'I was afraid he had misbehaved,' he 
cried; 'but he was always a good lad; and if he has done any thing for the 
niece of my dear Sir Hugh Tyrold, I shall hug him to my heart!' and then, in 
great, but pleased perturbation, he hurried away, saying to himself, as he 
went: 'I'll take him to her, to be sure; I desire nothing better! God bless 
her! If she can speak so well of my poor Hal, she must be the best girl living! 
and she shall have him ... yes, she shall have him, if she's a mind to him; and 
I don't care if she i'n't worth a groat; she's niece to my old friend; that's 
better.'

Camilla speeding, but not hearing him, returned to her seat; yet could not 
answer one question, from the horrors of her fears, and her shame of the detail 
of the business.

When the breakfast was over Miss Margland desired everyone would get ready to 
go to the lodgings; and, with Indiana, repaired herself to visit them, and give 
general orders. Dr. Marchmont had glided out of the room, in anxiety for Edgar; 
to the great dissatisfaction, and almost contempt of Dr. Orkborne, with whom he 
was just discussing some controverted points upon the shield of Achilles; 
which, that he could quit for the light concerns of a young man, added again to 
his surmises that, though he had run creditably the usual scholastic race, his 
reputation was more the effect of general ability and address, than of such 
sound and consummate learning as he himself possessed. Ruminating upon the 
ignorant injustice of mankind, in suffering such quacks in literature and 
philology to carry the palm of fame, he went to his chamber, to collect, from 
his bolster and bedside, the hoard of books and papers, from which, the 
preceding night, he had disencumbered his coat, waistcoat, and great coat 
pockets, inside and out, to review before he could sleep; and which now were 
again to encircle him, to facilitate their change of abode.

But Eugenia would not quit her afflicted sister, who soon, in her gentle 
breast, deposited the whole of her grief, her apprehensions, and her plans; 
charging her instantly to retire, if Edgar should return, that whatever might 
be the event he should unfold, she might release him immediately from an 
engagement that his last words seemed to avow did not make him happy, and that 
probably he now repented. The design was so consonant to the native heroism of 
Eugenia, that she consented, with applause, to aid its execution.

About half an hour, which seemed to be prolonged to twenty times the duration 
of the whole day, passed in terrible expectation; Edgar then appeared, and 
Eugenia, suspending her earnest curiosity, to comply with the acute feelings of 
her sister, retreated.

Camilla could scarce breathe; she stood up, her eyes and mouth open, her face 
pale, her hands uplifted, waiting, but not daring to demand intelligence.

Edgar, entering into her distress with a tenderness that drove from him his 
own, eagerly satisfied her: 'All,' he cried, 'is safe; the affair has been 
compromised; no duel has taken place; and the parties have mutually pledged 
themselves to forget the dispute.'

Tears again, but no longer bitter, flowed copiously down her cheeks, while her 
raised eyes and clasped hands expressed the fervency of her thankfulness.

Edgar, extremely touched, took her hand; he wished to seize a moment so nearly 
awful, to enforce upon her mind every serious subject with which he most 
desired it to be impressed; but sorrow was ever sacred to him; and desiring 
only, at this period, to console her: 'This adventure,' he cried, 'has now 
terminated so well, you must not suffer it to wound you. Dismiss it, sweet 
Camilla, from your memory!... at least till you are more composed.'

'No, sir!' cried Camilla, to whom his softness, by restoring her hope of an 
ultimately happy conclusion, restored strength; 'it ought never to be dismissed 
from my memory; and what I am now going to say will fix it there indelibly.'

Edgar was surprised, but pleased; his most anxious wishes seemed on the point 
of being fulfilled; he expected a voluntary explanation of every perplexity, a 
clearance of all mystery.

'I am sensible that I have appeared to you,' she resumed, 'in many points 
reprehensible; in some, perhaps, inexcusable....'

'Inexcusable? O no! never! never!'

'The letters of Sir Sedley Clarendel I know you think I ought not to have 
received....'

Edgar, biting his nails, looked down.

'And, indeed, I acknowledge myself, in that affair, a most egregious dupe!...'

She blushed; but her blush was colourless to that of Edgar. Resentment against 
Sir Sedley beat high in every vein; while disappointment to his delicacy, in 
the idea of Camilla duped by any man, seemed, in one blow, to detach him from 
her person, by a sudden dissolution of all charm to his mind in the connection.

Camilla saw, too late, she had been too hasty in a confession which some 
apologising account should have preceded; but what her courage had begun, pride 
now aided her to support, and she continued.

'For what belongs to that correspondence, and even for its being unknown to my 
friends, I may offer, perhaps, hereafter, something in exculpation; ... 
hereafter, I say, building upon your long family regard; for though we part ... 
it will be, I trust, in amity.'

'Part!' repeated Edgar, recovering from his displeasure by amazement.

'Yes, part,' said she, with assumed firmness; 'it would be vain to palliate 
what I cannot disguise from myself ... I am lessened in your esteem.' She could 
not go on; imperious shame took possession of her voice, crimsoned her very 
forehead, blushed even in her eyes, demolished her strained energy, and 
enfeebled her genuine spirit.

But the conscious taciturnity of Edgar recalled her exertions; struck and 
afflicted by the truth she had pronounced, he could not controvert it; he was 
mute; but his look spoke keen disturbance and bitter regret.

'Not so low, however, am I yet, I trust, fallen in your opinion, that you can 
wonder at the step I now take. I am aware of many errours; I know, too, that 
appearances have often cruelly misrepresented me; my errours you might have the 
candour to forget, and false appearances I could easily clear in my own 
favourâ€”but where, and what is the talisman which can erase from my own 
remembrance that you have thought me unworthy?'

Edgar started; but she would not give him time to speak; what she had last 
uttered was too painful to her to dwell upon, or hear answered, and rapidly, 
and in an elevated manner, she went on.

'I here, therefore, solemnly release you from all tie, all engagement whatever 
with Camilla Tyrold! I shall immediately acquaint my friends that henceforth 
... we Both are Free!'

She was then retiring. Edgar, confounded by a stroke so utterly and every way 
unexpected, neither answering nor interposing, till he saw her hand upon the 
lock of the door. In a voice then, that spoke him cut to the soul, though 
without attempting to stop her, 'This then,' he cried, 'Camilla, is your final 
adieu.'

She turned round, and with a face glowing, and eyes glistening, held out to him 
her hand: 'I knew not if you would accept,' she said, 'a kinder word, or I 
should have assured you of my unaltered regard ... and have claimed the 
continuance of your friendship, and even ... if your patience is not utterly 
exhausted, of your watchful counsel.... Farewell! remember me without severity! 
my own esteem must be permanent as my existence!'

The door, here, was opened by Miss Margland and Indiana, and Camilla hastily 
snatched away the hand which Edgar, grasping with the fondness of renovated 
passion, secretly meant to part with no more, till a final reconciliation once 
again made it his own; but compelled to yield to circumstance, he suffered it 
to be withdrawn; and while she darted into the chamber of Eugenia, to hide her 
deep emotion from Indiana, who was tittering, and Miss Margland, who was 
sneering, at the situation in which she was surprised, he abruptly took leave 
himself, too much impressed by this critical scene, to labour for uninteresting 
discourse.
