
How to treat a Defamer

As the lodgings taken by Miss Margland could not be ready till the afternoon, 
Camilla remained with her sister; a sojourn which, while it consoled her with 
the society, and gratified her by the approbation of Eugenia, had yet another 
allurement; it detained her under the same roof with Edgar; and his manner of 
listening to her rejection, and his undisguised suffering before they were 
parted, led her to expect he might yet demand a conference before she quitted 
the hotel.

In about an hour, as unpleasantly as unceremoniously, they were broken in upon 
by Mrs. Mittin.

'How monstrous lucky, my dear,' cried she, to Camilla, 'that I should find you, 
and your little sister, for I suppose this is she, together! I went into your 
dining-room to ask for you, and there I met those other two ladies; and I've 
made acquaintance with 'em, I assure you, already; for I told them I was on a 
visit at the Honourable Mrs. Berlinton's. So I've had the opportunity to 
recommend some shops to 'em, and I've been to tell some of the good folks to 
send them some of their nicest goods for 'em to look at; for, really, since 
I've been bustling a little about here, I've found some of the good people so 
vastly obliging, I can't but take a pleasure in serving 'em, and getting 'em a 
few customers, especially as I know a little civility of that sort makes one 
friends surprisingly. Often and often have I got things under prime cost 
myself, only by helping a person on in his trade. So one can't say good 
nature's always thrown away. However, I come now on purpose to put a note into 
your own hands, from Mrs. Berlinton; for all the servants were out of the way, 
except one, and he wanted to be about something else, so I offered to bring it, 
and she was very much pleased; so I fancy it's about some secret, for she never 
offered to shew it me; but as to the poor man I saved from the walk, I've won 
his heart downright; I dare say he'll go of any odd errand for me, now, without 
vails. That's the best of good nature, it always comes home to one.'

The note from Mrs. Berlinton contained a tender supplication for the return of 
Camilla, and a pressing and flattering invitation that her sister should join 
their little party, as the motives of honour and discretion which made her, at 
the request and for the sake of her brother, sacrifice her eagerness to be 
presented to Miss Lynmere, operated not to impede her acquaintance with Miss 
Eugenia.

This proposition had exquisite charms for Eugenia. To become acquainted with 
the sister of him to whom, henceforward, she meant to devote her secret 
thoughts, enchanted her imagination. Camilla, therefore, negotiated the visit 
with Miss Margland, who, though little pleased by this separate invitation, 
knew not how to refuse her concurrence; but Indiana, indignant that the sister 
of Melmond should not, first, have waited upon her, and solicited her 
friendship, privately resolved, in pique of this disrespect, to punish the 
brother with every rigour she could invent.

Camilla, upon her return, found Mrs. Mittin already deeply engaged in proposing 
an alteration in the dress of Eugenia, which she was aiding Molly Mill to 
accomplish; and so much she found to say and to do, to propose and to object 
to, to contrive and to alter, that, from the simplicity of the mistress, and 
the ignorance of the maid, the one was soon led to conclude she should have 
appeared improperly before Mrs. Berlinton, without such useful advice; and the 
other to believe she must shortly have lost her place, now her young lady was 
come forth into the world, if she had not thus miraculously met with so good a 
friend.

During these preparations, Camilla was summoned back to the dining-room to 
receive Mr. Westwyn.

She did not hear this call with serenity. The danger which, however 
unwittingly, she had caused his son, and the shocking circumstances which were 
its foundation, tingled her cheeks, and confounded her wish of making 
acknowledgments, with an horror that such an obligation could be possible.

The door of the dining-room was open, and as soon as her steps were heard, Mr. 
Westwyn came smiling forth to receive her. She hung back involuntarily; but, 
pacing up to her, and taking her hand, 'Well, my good young lady,' he cried, 'I 
have brought you my son; but he's no boaster, that I can assure you, for though 
I told him how you wanted him to come to you, and was so good as to say you 
were so much obliged to him, I can't make him own he has ever seen you in his 
life; which I tell him is carrying his modesty over far; I don't like 
affectation ... I have no taste for it.'

Camilla, discovering by this speech, as well as by his pleased and tranquil 
manner, that he had escaped hearing of the intended duel, and that his son was 
still ignorant whose cause he had espoused, ardently wished to avert farther 
shame by concealing herself; and, step by step, kept retreating back towards 
the room of Eugenia; though she could not disengage her hand from the old 
gentleman, who, trying to draw her on, said: 'Come, my dear! don't go away. 
Though my son won't confess what he has done for you, he can't make me forget 
that you were such a dear soul as to tell me yourself, of his good behaviour, 
and of your having such a kind opinion of him. And I have been telling him, and 
I can assure you I'll keep my word, that if he has done a service to the niece 
of my dear old friend, Sir Hugh Tyrold, it shall value him fifty pound a-year 
more to his income, if I straighten myself never so much. For a lad, that knows 
how to behave in that manner, will never spend his money so as to make his old 
father ashamed of him. And that's a good thing for a man to know.'

'Indeed, sir, this is some mistake,' said the young man himself, now advancing 
into the passage, while Camilla was stammering out an excuse from entering; 
'it's some great mistake; I have not the honour to know....'

He was going to add Miss Tyrold, but he saw her at the same moment, and 
instantly recollecting her face, stopt, blushed, and looked amazed.

The retreating effort of Camilla, her shame and her pride, all subsided by his 
view, and gave place to the more generous feelings of gratitude for his 
intuitive good opinion, and emotion for the risk he had run in her defence: and 
with an expression of captivating sweetness in her eyes and manner, 'That you 
did not know me,' she cried, 'makes the peculiarity of your goodness, which, 
indeed, I am more sensible to than I can express.'

'Why, there! there, now! there!' cried Mr. Westwyn, while his son, enchanted to 
find whose character he had sustained, bowed almost to the ground with 
respectful gratitude for such thanks; 'only but listen! she says the very same 
things to your face, that she said behind your back! though I am afraid, it's 
only to please an old father; for if not, I can't for my life find out any 
reason why you should deny it. Come, Hal, speak out, Hal!'

Equally at a loss how either to avow or evade what had passed in the presence 
of Camilla, young Westwyn began a stammering and awkward apology; but Camilla, 
feeling doubly his forbearance, said: 'Silence may in you be delicate ... but 
in me it would be graceless.' Then, turning from him to old Mr. Westwyn, 'you 
may be proud, sir,' she cried, 'of your son! It was the honour of an utter 
stranger he was protecting, as helpless as she was unknown at the time she 
excited his interest; nor had he even in view this poor mede he now receives of 
her thanks!'

'My dearest Hal!' cried Mr. Westwyn, wringing him by the hand; 'if you have but 
one small grain of regard for me, don't persist in denying this! I'd give the 
last hundred pounds I had in the world to be sure it was true!'

'That to hear the name of this lady,' said the young man, 'should not be 
necessary to inspire me with respect for her, who can wonder? that any 
opportunity could arise in which she should want defence, is all that can give 
any surprise.'

'You own it, then, my dear Hal? you own you've done her a kindness? why then, 
my dear Hal, you've done one to me! and I can't help giving you a hug for it, 
let who will think me an old fool.'

He then fervently embraced his son, who confused, though gratified, strove 
vainly to make disclaiming speeches. 'No, no, my dear Hal,' he cried, 'you 
sha'n't let yourself down with me again, I promise you, though you've two or 
three times tried to make me think nothing of you; but this young lady here, 
dear soul, speaks another language; she says I may be proud of my son! and I 
dare say she knows why, for she's a charming girl, as ever I saw; so I will be 
proud of my son! Poor dear Hal! thou hast got a good friend, I can tell thee, 
in that young lady! and she's niece to the best man I ever knew; and I value 
her good opinion more than anybody's.'

'You are much too good,' cried Camilla, in an accent of tender pleasure, the 
result of grateful joy, that she had not been the means of destroying the 
paternal happiness of so fond a father, joined to the dreadful certainty how 
narrowly she had escaped that misery; 'you are much too good, and I blush even 
to thank you, when I thinkâ€”'

What she meant to add was in a moment forgotten, and that she blushed ceased to 
be metaphorical, when now, as they all three entered the dining-room together, 
the first object that met her eyes was Edgar.

Their eyes met not again; delighted and conscious, she turned hers hastily 
away. He comes, thought she, to [claim] me! he will not submit to the 
separation; he comes to re-assure me of his esteem, and to receive once more my 
faithful heart!

Edgar had seen, by chance, the Westwyns pass to the room of the Cleves party, 
and felt the most ardent desire to know if they would meet with Camilla, and 
what would be her reception of her young champion, whose sword, with extreme 
trouble, he had himself that morning sheathed, and whose gallantry he 
attributed to a vehement, however, sudden passion. Dr. Marchmont acknowledged 
the epoch to be highly interesting for observation, and, presuming upon their 
old right of intimacy with all the party, they abruptly made a second visit.

Miss Margland and Indiana, who were examining some goods sent by Mrs. Mittin, 
had received them all four without much mark of civility; and Mr. Westwyn 
immediately desired Camilla to be sent for, and kept upon the watch, till her 
step made him hasten out to meet her.

Edgar could not hear unmoved the dialogue which ensued; he imagined an amiable 
rival was suddenly springing up in young Westwyn, at the very moment of his own 
dismission, which he now even thought possible this incipient conquest had 
urged; and when Camilla, walking between the father and the son, with looks of 
softest sensibility, came into the room, he thought he had never seen her so 
lovely, and that her most bewitching smiles were purposely lavished for their 
captivation.

With this idea, he found it impossible to speak to her; their situation, 
indeed, was too critical for any common address, and when he saw that she 
turned from him, he attempted to converse with the other ladies upon their 
purchases; and Camilla, left to her two new beaux, had the unavoidable 
appearance of being engrossed by them, though the sight of Edgar instantly 
robbed them of all her real attention.

Soon after, the door was again opened, and Mr. Girt, the young perfumer, came, 
smirking and scraping, into the room, with a box of various toys, essences, and 
cosmetics, recommended by Mrs. Mittin.

Ignorant of the mischief he had done her, and not even recollecting to have 
seen him, Camilla made on to look at his goods; but Edgar, to whom his 
audacious assertions were immediately brought back by his sight, would have 
made him feel the effects of his resentment, had not his passion for Camilla 
been of so solid, as well as warm a texture, as to induce him to prefer 
guarding her delicacy, to any possible display he could make of his feelings to 
others, or even to herself.

Mr. Girt, in the midst of his exhibition of memorandum books, smelling bottles, 
tooth-pick cases, and pocket mirrours; with washes to immortalize the skin, 
powders becoming to all countenances, and pomatums to give natural tresses to 
old age, suddenly recollected Camilla. The gross mistake he had made he had 
already discovered, by having dodged her to the house of Mrs. Berlinton; but 
all alarm at it hid ceased, by finding, through a visit made to his shop by 
Mrs. Mittin, that she was uninformed he had propagated it. Not gifted with the 
discernment to see in the air and manner of Camilla her entire, though 
unassuming superiority to her accidental associate, he concluded them both to 
be relations of some of the upper domestics; and with a look and tone 
descending from the most profound adulation, with which he was presenting his 
various articles to Miss Margland and Indiana, into a familiarity the most 
facetious, 'O dear, ma'am,' he cried, 'I did not see you at first; I hope 
t'other lady's well that's been so kind as to recommend me? Indeed I saw her 
just now.'

Young Westwyn, to whom, as to Edgar, the bold defamation of Girt occurred with 
his presence, but whom none of the nameless delicacies of the peculiar 
situation, and peculiar character of Edgar, restrained into silence, felt such 
a disgust at the presumption of effrontery that gave him courage for this 
facetious address, to a young lady whose innocence of his ill usage made him 
think its injury double, that, unable to repress his indignation, he abruptly 
whispered in his ear, 'Walk out of the room, sir!'

The amazed perfumer, at this haughty and unexpected order, stared, and cried 
aloud, 'No offence, I hope, sir?'

Mr. Westwyn asked what was the matter? while Camilla, crimsoned by the familiar 
assurance with which she had been addressed, retired to a window.

'Nothing of any moment, sir,' answered Henry; and again, in a low but still 
more positive voice, he repeated his command to Girt.

'Sir, I'm not used to be used in this manner!' answered he, hardily, and 
hoping, by raising his tone, for the favourable intervention of the company.

Indiana, now, was preparing to scream, and Miss Margland was looking round to 
see whom she should reprehend; but young Westwyn, coolly opening the door, with 
a strong arm, and an able jerk, twisted the perfumer into the passage, saying, 
'You may send somebody for your goods.'

Girt, who equally strong, but not equally adroit as Henry, strove in vain to 
resist, vowed vengeance for this assault. Henry, without seeming to hear him, 
occupied himself with looking at what he had left. Camilla felt her eyes 
suffuse with tears; and Edgar, for the first time in his life, found himself 
visited by the baleful passion of envy.

Miss Margland could not comprehend what this meant; Indiana comprehended but 
too much in finding there was some disturbance of which she was not the object; 
but Mr. Westwyn, losing his look of delight, said, with something of severity, 
'Ha! what did you turn that man out of the room for?'

'He is perfectly aware of my reason, sir,' said Henry; and then added it was a 
long story, which he begged to relate another time.

The blank face of Mr. Westwyn shewed displeasure and mortification. He lifted 
the head of his cane to his mouth, and after biting it for some time, with a 
frowning countenance, muttered, 'I don't like to see a man turned out of a 
room. If he's done any harm, tell him so; and if it's worse than harm, souse 
him in a horsepond; I've no objection: But I don't like to see a man turned out 
of a room; it's very unmannerly; and I did not think Hal would do such a 
thing.' Then suddenly, and with a succinct bow, bidding them all good bye, he 
took a hasty leave; still, however, muttering, all the way along the passage, 
and down the stairs, loud enough to be heard: 'Kicking and jerking a man about 
does not prove him to be in the wrong. I thought Hal had been more of a 
gentleman. If I don't find the man turns out to be a rascal, Hal shall beg his 
pardon; for I don't like to see a man turned out of a room.'

Henry, whose spirit was as irritable as it was generous, felt acutely this 
public censure, which, though satisfied he did not deserve, every species of 
propriety prohibited his explaining away. With a forced smile, therefore, and a 
silent bow, he followed his father.

Miss Margland and Indiana now burst forth with a torrent of wonders, 
conjectures, and questions; but the full heart of Camilla denied her speech, 
and the carriage of Mrs. Berlinton being already at the door, she called upon 
Eugenia, and followed, perforce, by Mrs. Mittin, left the hotel.

Edgar and Dr. Marchmont gave neither surprise nor concern by retiring instantly 
to their own apartment.

'Dr. Marchmont,' said the former, in a tone of assumed moderation, 'I have lost 
Camilla! I see it plainly. This young man steps forward so gallantly, so 
ingenuously, nay so amiably, that the contrast ... chill, severe, and repulsive 
... must render me ... in this detestable state ... insupportable to all her 
feelings. Dr. Marchmont! I have not a doubt of the event!'

'The juncture is, indeed, perilous, and the trial of extremest hazard; but it 
is such as draws all uncertainty to a crisis, and, therefore, is not much to be 
lamented. You may safely, I think, rest upon it your destiny. To a general 
female heart a duel is the most dangerous of all assaults, and the most 
fascinating of all charms; and a duellist, though precisely what a woman most 
should dread, as most exposing her to public notice, is the person of all 
others she can, commonly, least resist. By this test, then, prove your Camilla. 
Her champion seems evidently her admirer, and his father her adorer. Her late 
engagement with you may possibly not reach them; or reaching but with its 
dissolution, serve only to render them more eager.'

'Do you suppose him,' cried Edgar, after a pause of strong disturbance; 'do you 
suppose him rich?'

'Certainly not. That the addition of fifty pounds a-year to his income should 
be any object, proves his fortune to be very moderate.'

'Clear her, then, at least,' said he, with a solemnity almost reproachful; 
'clear her, at least, of every mercenary charge! If I lose her ...' he gasped 
for breath ... 'she will not, you find, be bought from me! and pique, anger, 
injustice, nay inconstancy, all are less debasing than the sordid corruption of 
which you suspected her.'

'This does not, necessarily, prove her disinterested; she is too young, yet, to 
know herself the value she may hereafter set upon wealth. And, independent of 
that inexperience, there is commonly so little stability, so little internal 
hold, in the female character, that any sudden glare of adventitious lure, will 
draw them, for the moment, from any and every regular plan of substantial 
benefit. It remains, therefore, now to be tried, if Beech Park, and its master 
united, can vie with the bright and intoxicating incense of a life voluntarily 
risked, in support ... not of her fair fame, that was unknown to its defender 
... but simply of the fair countenance which seemed its pledge.'

Edgar, heartless and sad, attempted no further argument; he thought the Doctor 
prejudiced against the merits of Camilla; yet it appeared, even to himself, 
that her whole conduct, from the short period of his open avowal, had seemed a 
wilful series of opposition to his requests and opinions. And while terror for 
surrounding dangers gave weight to his disapprobation of her visiting 
Southampton, with a lady she knew him to think more attractive than safe or 
respectable, her sufferance of the vulgar and forward Mrs. Mittin, with whom 
again he saw her quit the hotel, was yet more offensive, since he could 
conceive for it no other inducement than a careless, if not determined humour, 
to indulge every impulse, in equal contempt of his counsel, and her own 
reflection.

All blame, however, of Camilla, was short of his self-dissatisfaction, in the 
distance imposed upon him by uncertainty, and the coldness dictated by 
discretion. At a period so sensitive, when her spirit was alarmed, and her 
delicacy was wounded, that a stranger should start forward, to vindicate her 
innocence, and chastise its detractors, was singular, was unfortunate, was 
nearly intolerable; and he thought he could with thankfulness, have renounced 
half his fortune, to have been himself the sole protector of Camilla.
