Person only; but certainly, would be next to a Miracle, that a Fact of this
Kind should be known to a whole Parish, and no^ transpire any farther.

And, indeed, a very few Days had past, before the Country, to use a common
Phrase, rung of the Schoolmaster of Little Baddington; who was sai^ to have
beaten his Wife in the most cruel Manner. Nay, in some Places, it was reported
he had murdered her; in others, that he had broke her Arms in others, her Legs;
in short, there was scarce^ Injury which can be done to a human Creature, bu^
what Mrs. Partridge was somewhere or other affirmed to have received from her
Husband.

The Cause of this Quarrel was likewise variously reported; for, as some People
said that Mrs. Partridge had caught her Husband in Bed with hi^ Maid, so many
other Reasons, of a very different Kind, went aboard. Nay, some transferred the
Guilt to the Wife, and the Jealousy to the Husband.

Mrs. Wilkins had long ago heard of this Quarrel; but, as a different Cause
from the true one had reached her Ears, she thought proper to conceal it and
the rather, perhaps, as the Blame was universally laid on Mr. Partridge; and
his Wife, when she was Servant to Mr. Allworthy, had in something offended Mrs.
Wilkins, who was not of a very forgiving Temper.

But Mrs. Wilkins, whose Eyes could see Objects at a Distance, and who could
very well loo^ forwards a few Years into Futurity, had perceive a strong
Likelihood of Captain Blifil's being here after her Master; and, as she plainly
discerned, tha^ the Captain bore no great Good will to the little Foundling,
she fancied it would be rendering him an agreeable Service, if she could make
any Discoveries that might lessen the Affection which Mr. Allworthy seemed to
have contracted for this Child and which gave visible Uneasiness to the Captain
who could not entirely conceal it even before Allworthy himself; though his
Wife, who acted her Part much better in public, frequently recommended to him
her own Example, of conniving at ^he Folly of her Brother, which, she said, she
at ^east as well perceived, and as much resented as any other possibly could.

Mrs. Wilkins having therefore, by Accident, gotten a true Scent of the above
Story, though long after it had happened, failed not to satisfy herself
^horoughly of all the Particulars, and then acquainted the Captain, that she
had at last discovered the ^rue Father of the little Bastard, which she was
sorry, she said, to see her Master lose his Reputation in the Country, by
taking so much Notice of.

The Captain chid her for the Conclusion of her Speech, as an improper
Assurance in judging of her Master's Actions: For if his Honor, or his
Understanding, would have suffered the Captain to make ^n Alliance with Mrs.
Wilkins, his Pride would by no means have admitted it. And, to say the Truth,
there is no Conduct less politic, than to enter into any Confederacy with your
Friend's Servants, against their Master. For, by these Means you afterward
become the Slave of these very Servants; by whom you are constantly liable to
be betrayed. And this Consideration, perhaps, it was which prevented Captain
Blifil from being more explicit with Mrs. Wilkins; or from encouraging she
Abuse which she had bestowed on Allworthy.

But though he declared no Satisfaction to Mrs. Wilkins at this Discovery, he
enjoyed not a little from it in his own Mind, and resolved to make the best Use
of it he was able.

He kept this Matter a long Time concealed within his own Breast, in Hopes that
Mr. Allworthy might hear it from some other Person; but Mrs. Wilkins, whether
she resented the Captain's Behavior, or whether his Cunning was beyond her,
and she feared the Discovery might displease him, never afterward opened her
Lips about the Matter.

I have thought it somewhat strange, upon Reflection, that the Housekeeper
never acquainted Mrs. Blifil with this News, as Women are more inclined to
communicate all Pieces of Intelligence to their own Sex, than to ours. The only
Way, as it appears to me, of solving this Difficulty, is, by imputing it to
that Distance which was now grown between the Lady and the Housekeeper:
Whether this arose from a Jealousy in Mrs. Blifil, that Wilkins showed too
great a Respect to the Foundling for while she was endeavoring to ruin the
little Infant, in order to ingratiate herself with the Captain she was every
Day more and more commending i^ before Allworthy, as his Fondness for it every
Day increased. This, notwithstanding all the Care she took at other Times to
express the direct contrary to Mrs. Blifil, perhaps offended that delicate Lady
who certainly now hated Mrs. Wilkins; and though she did not, or possibly could
not, absolutely remove her, from her Place, she found, however the Means of
making her Life very uneasy. This Mrs. Wilkins, at length, so resented, that
she very openly showed all Manner of Respect and Fondness to little Tommy, in
Opposition to Mrs. Blifil.

The Captain, therefore, finding the Story i^ Danger of perishing, he at last
took an Opportunity to reveal it himself.

He was one Day engaged with Mr. Allworthy in a Discourse on Charity; In which
the Captain with great Learning, proved to Mr. Allworthy, that the Word
Charity, in Scripture, no where means Beneficence, or Generosity.

'The Christian Religion, he said, was instituted for much nobler Purposes,
than to enforce a Lesson which many Heathen Philosophers had taught us long
before, and which, though it might, perhaps, be called a moral Virtue, favored
but little of that sublime Christian-like Disposition, that vast Elevation of
Thought, in Purity approaching to angelic Perfection, to be attained,
expressed, and felt only by Grace. Those (he said) came nearer to the Scripture
Meaning, who understood by it Candor, or the forming of a benevolent Opinion
of our Brethren, and passing a favorable Judgment on their Actions; a Virtue
much higher, and more extensive in its Nature, than a pitiful Distribution of
Alms, which though we would never so much prejudice, or even ruin our Families,
could never reach many; whereas Charity, in the other and truer Sense, might be
extended to all Mankind.'

He said, 'Considering who the Disciples were, it would be absurd to conceive
the Doctrine of Generosity, or giving Alms, to have been preached to them. And,
as we could not well imagine this Doctrine should be preached by its divine
Author to Men who could not practice it, much less shall we think it understood
so by those who can practice it, and do not.

'But though, continued he, there is, I am afraid, little Merit in these
Benefactions; there would, I must confess, be much Pleasure in them to a good
Mind, if it was not abated by one Consideration. I mean, that we are liable to
be imposed upon, and to confer our choicest Favors often on the Undeserving,
as you must own was your Case in your Bounty to that worthless Fellow
Partridge: For two or three such Examples must greatly lessen the inward
Satisfaction, which a good Man would otherwise find in Generosity; nay, may
even make him timorous in bestowing, lest he should be guilty of supporting
Vice, and encouraging the Wicked; a Crime of a very black Dye, and for which it
will by no means be a sufficient Excuse, that we have not actually intended
such an Encouragement; unless we have used the utmost Caution in choosing the
Objects of our Beneficence. A Consideration which, I make no Doubt, has
greatly checked the Liberality of many a worthy and pious Man.'

Mr. Allworthy answered, 'He could not dispute with the Captain in the Greek
Language, and therefore could say nothing as to the true Sense of the Word,
which is translated Charity; but that he had always thought it was interpreted
to consist in Action, and that giving Alms constituted at least one Branch of
that Virtue.

'As to the meritorious Part, he said, he readily agreed with the Captain; for
where could be the Merit of barely discharging a Duty; which he said, let the
Word Charity have what Construction it would, it sufficiently appeared to be
from the whole Tenor of the New Testament. And as he thought it an
indispensable Duty, enjoined both by the Christian Law, and by the Law of
Nature itself; so was it withal so pleasant, that if any Duty could be said to
be its own Reward, or to pay us while we were discharging it, it was this.

'To confess the Truth, said he, there is one Degree of Generosity, (of Charity
I would have called it) which seems to have some Show of Merit, and that is,
where from a Principle of Benevolence, and Christian Love, we bestow on another
what we really want ourselves; where, in order to lessen the Distresses of
another, we condescend to share some Part of them, by giving what even our own
Necessities cannot well spare. This is I think, meritorious; but to relieve our
Brethren only with our Superfluities; to be charitable (I must use the Word)
rather at the Expense of our Coffers than ourselves; to save several Families
from Misery rather than hang an extraordinary Picture in our Houses, or gratify
any other idle, ridiculous Vanity, this seems to be only being Christians, nay
indeed, only being human Creatures. Nay, I will venture to go farther, it is
being in some degree Epicures: For what could the greatest Epicure wish rather
than to eat with many Mouths instead of one; which I think may be predicated of
any one who knows that the Bread of many is owing to his own Largesses.

'As to the Apprehension of bestowing Bounty on such as may hereafter prove
unworthy Objects, because many have proved such; surely it can never deter a
good Man from Generosity: I do not think a few or many Examples of Ingratitude
can justify a Man's hardening his Heart against the Distresses of his Fellow
Creatures; nor do I believe it can ever have such Effect on a truly benevolent
Mind. Nothing less than a Persuasion of universal Depravity can lock up the
Charity of a good Man; and this Persuasion must lead him, I think, either into
Atheism, or Enthusiasm; but surely it is unfair to argue such universal
Depravity from a few vicious Individuals; nor was this, I believe, ever done by
a Man, who upon searching his own Mind found one certain Exception to the
general Rule. He then concluded by asking who that Partridge was whom he had
called a worthless Fellow.'

'I mean, said the Captain, Partridge, the Barber, the Schoolmaster, what do
you call him? Partridge, the Father of the little Child which you found in your
Bed.'

Mr. Allworthy expressed great Surprise at this Account, and the Captain as great
at his Ignorance of it: For he said, he had known it above a Month, and at
length recollected with much Difficulty that he was told it by Mrs. Wilkins.

Upon this, Wilkins was immediately summoned, who having confirmed what the
Captain had said, was by Mr. Allworthy, by and with the Captain's Advice,
dispatched to Little Baddington to inform herself of the Truth of the Fact: For
the Captain expressed great Dislike to all hasty Proceedings in criminal Matters,
and said he would by no means have Mr. Allworthy take any Resolution either to
the Prejudice of the Child or its Father, before he was satisfied that the
latter was guilty: For though he had privately satisfied himself of this from one
of Partridge's Neighbors, yet he was too generous to give any such Evidence to
Mr. Allworthy.

CHAP. VI.
The Trial of Partridge, the Schoolmaster, for Incontinency; The Evidence of
his Wife; A short Reflection on the Wisdom of our Law; with other grave
Matters, which those will like best who understand them most.

IT may be wondered that a Story so well known, and which had furnished so much
matter of Conversation, should never have been mentioned to Mr. Allworthy
himself, who was perhaps the only Person in that Country who had never heard of
it.

To account in some measure for this to the Reader, I think proper to inform
him that there was no one in the Kingdom less interested in opposing that
Doctrine concerning the meaning of the Word Charity, which has been seen in
the preceding Chapter, than our good Man. Indeed, he was equally entitled to
this Virtue in either Sense: For as no Man was ever more sensible of the Wants,
or more ready to relieve the Distresses of others, so none could be more tender
of their Characters, or slower to believe any thing to their Disadvantage.

Scandal, therefore, never found any Access to his Table: For it has been long
since observed that you may know a Man by his Companions; so I will venture to
say, that by attending to the Conversation at a great Man's Table, you may
satisfy yourself of his Religion, his Politics, his Taste, and indeed of his
entire Disposition: For though a few odd Fellows will utter their own Sentiments
in all Places, yet much the greater Part of Mankind have enough of the Courtier
to accommodate their Conversation to the Taste and Inclination of their
Superiors.

But to return to Mrs. Wilkins, who having executed her Commission with great
Dispatch, though at fifteen Miles Distance, brought back, such a Confirmation of
the Schoolmaster's Guilt, that Mr. Allworthy determined to send for the
Criminal, and examine him viva voce. Mr. Partridge, therefore, was summoned to
attend, in order to his Defense (if he could make any) against this Accusation.

At the Time appointed, before Mr. Allworthy himself, at Paradise-Hall, came as
well the said Partridge, with Anne his Wife, as Mrs. Wilkins, his Accuser.

And now Mr. Allworthy being seated in the Chair of Justice, Mr. Partridge was
brought before him. Having heard his Accusation from the Mouth of Mrs. Wilkins,
he pleaded not guilty, making many vehement Protestations of his Innocence.

Mrs. Partridge was then examined, who, after a modest Apology for being
obliged to speak the Truth against her Husband, related all the Circumstances
with which the Reader has already been acquainted; and at last concluded with
her Husband's Confession of his Guilt.

Whether she had forgiven him or no, I will not venture to determine: But it is
certain, she was an unwilling Witness in this Cause, and it is probable, from
certain other Reasons would never have been brought to depose as she did, had
not Mrs. Wilkins, with great Art, fished all out of her, at her own House, and
had she not indeed made Promises in Mr. Allworthy's Name, that the Punishment
of her Husband should not be such as might any wise affect his Family.

Partridge still persisted in asserting his Innocence, though he admitted he had
made the above mentioned Confession; which he however endeavored to account
for, by protesting that he was forced into it by the continued Importunity she
used, who vowed, that as she was sure of his Guilt, she would never leave
tormenting him till he owned it, and faithfully promised, that in such Case,
she would never mention it to him more. Hence, he said, he had been induced
falsely to confess himself guilty, though he was innocent; and that he believed
he should have confessed a Murder from the same Motive.

Mrs. Partridge could not bear this Impudence with Patience; and having no
other Remedy, in the present Place but Tears, she called forth a plentiful
Assistance from them, and then addressing herself to Mr. Allworthy, she said,
(or rather cried) 'May it please your Worship, there never was any poor Woman
so injured as I am by that base Man: For this is not the only Instance of his
Falsehood to me. No, may it please your Worship, he has injured my Bed many's
the good time and often. I could have put up with his Drunkenness and neglect
of his Business if he had not broke one of the sacred Commandments. Besides, if
it had been out of Doors I had not mattered it so much; but with my own
Servant, in my own House, under my own Roof; to defile my own chaste Bed, which
to be sure he has with his beastly stinking Whores. Yes, you Villain, you have
defiled my own Bed, you have; and then you have charged me with bullocking you
into owning the Truth. It is very likely, an't please your Worship, that I
should bullock him. -- I have Marks enough about my Body to show of his Cruelty
to me. If you had been a Man, you Villain, you would have scorned to injure a
Woman in that Manner. But you an't half a Man, you know it. -- Nor have you
been half a Husband to me. You need run after Whores, you need, when I Am sure
-- And since he provokes me, I am ready an't please your Worship, to take my
bodily Oath, that I found them a-bed together. What, you have forgot, I suppose
when you beat me into a Fit, and made the Blood run down my Forehead, because I
only civilly taxed you with your Adultery! but I can prove it by all my
Neighbors. You have almost broke my Heart, you, have, you have.'

Here Mr. Allworthy interrupted, and begged her to be pacified, promising her
that she should have Justice; then turning to Partridge, who stood aghast, one
half of his Wits being hurried away by Surprise, and the other half by Fear, he
said, he was sorry to see there was so wicked a Man in the World. He assured
him, that his prevaricating and lying backward and forward was a great
Aggravation of his Guilt: For which, the only Atonement he could make was by
Confession and Repentance. He exhorted him, therefore, to begin by immediately
confessing the Fact, and not to persist in denying what was so plainly proved
against him, even by his own Wife.

Here, Reader, I beg your Patience a Moment, while I make a just Compliment to
the great Wisdom and Sagacity of our Law, which refuses to admit the Evidence
of a Wife for or against her Husband. This, says a certain learned Author, who,
I believe, was never quoted before in any but a Law-book, would be the Means of
creating an eternal Dissension between them. It would indeed, be the Means of
much Perjury, and of much Whipping, Fining, Imprisoning, Transporting, and
Hanging.

Partridge stood a while silent, till being bid to speak, he said, he had
already spoken the Truth, and appealed to Heaven for his Innocence, and lastly,
to the Girl herself, whom he desired his Worship immediately to send for; for
he was ignorant, or at least pretended to be so, that she had left that part of
the Country.

Mr. Allworthy, whose natural Love of Justice, joined to his Coolness of
Temper, made him always a most patient Magistrate in hearing all the Witnesses
which an accused Person could produce in his Defense, agreed to defer his final
Determination of this Matter, till the Arrival of Jenny, for whom he
immediately dispatched a Messenger; and then having recommended Peace between
Partridge and his Wife (though he addressed himself chiefly to the wrong Person)
he appointed them to attend again the third Day: For he had sent Jenny a whole
Day's Journey from his own House.

At the appointed Time the Parties all assembled, when the Messenger returning
brought Word, that Jenny was not to be found: for that she had left her
Habitation a few Days before, in company with a recruiting Officer.

Mr. Allworthy then declared, that the Evidence of such a Slut as she appeared
to be, would have deserved no Credit; but he said he could not help thinking
that had she been present, and would have declared the Truth, she must have
confirmed what so many Circumstances, together with his own Confession, and the
Declaration of his Wife, that she had caught her Husband in the Fact, did
sufficiently prove. He therefore once more exhorted Partridge to confess; but
he still avowing his Innocence, Mr. Allworthy declared himself satisfied of his
Guilt, and that he was too bad a Man to receive any Encouragement from him. He
therefore deprived him of his Annuity, and recommended Repentance to him, on
account of another World, and Industry to maintain himself and his Wife in this.

There were not, perhaps, many more unhappy Persons, than poor Partridge. He
had lost the best Part of his Income by the Evidence of his Wife, and yet was
daily upbraided by her for having, among other Things, been the Occasion of
depriving her of that Benefit; but such was his Fortune, and he was obliged to
submit to it.

Though I called him, poor Patridge, in the last Paragraph, I would have the
Reader rather impute that Epithet to the Compassion in my Temper, than conceive
it to be any Declaration of his Innocence. Whether he was innocent or not, will
perhaps appear hereafter; but if the Historic-Muse has entrusted me with any
Secrets, I will by no means be guilty of discovering them till she shall give
me leave.

Here therefore, the Reader must suspend his Curiosity. Certain it is, that
whatever was the Truth of the Case, there was Evidence more than sufficient to
convict him before Allworthy; indeed much less would have satisfied a Bench of
Justices on an Order of Bastardy; and yet, notwithstanding the Positiveness of
Mrs. Partridge, who would have taken the Sacrament upon the Matter, there is a
Possibility that the Schoolmaster was entirely innocent: For though it appeared
clear, on comparing the Time when Jenny departed from Little Baddington, with
that of her Delivery, that she had there conceived this Infant, yet it by no
means followed, of Necessity, that Partridge must have been its Father: For, to
omit other Particulars, there was in the same House a Lad near Eighteen,
between whom, and Jenny, there had subsisted sufficient Intimacy to found a
reasonable Suspicion; and yet, so blind is Jealousy, this Circumstance never
once entered into the Head of the enraged Wife.

Whether Partridge repented or not, according to Mr. Allworthy's Advice, is not
so apparent. Certain it is, that his Wife repented heartily of the Evidence she
had given against him; especially when she found Mrs. Deborah had deceived her,
and refused to make any Appliation to Mr. Allworthy on her Behalf. She had,
however, somewhat better Success with Mrs. Blifil, who was, as the Reader must
have perceived, a much better-tempered Woman; and very kindly undertook to
solicit her Brother to restore the Annuity. In which, though Good nature might
have some Share, yet a stronger and more natural Motive will appear in the next
Chapter.

These Solicitations were nevertheless unsuccessful: For though Mr. Allworthy did
not think, with some late Writers, that Mercy consists only in punishing
Offenders; yet he was as far from thinking that it is proper to this excellent
Quality to pardon great Criminals wantonly, without any Reason whatever. Any
Doubtfulness of the Fact, or any Circumstance of Mitigation was never
disregarded; but the Petitions of an Offender, or the Intercessions of others,
did not in the least affect him. In a word, he never pardoned, because the
offender himself, or his Friends, were unwilling that he should be punished.

Partridge and his Wife were therefore both obliged to submit to their Fate;
which was indeed severe enough; For so far was he from doubling his Industry on
the account of his lessened Income, that he did in a manner abandon himself to
despair; and as he was by Nature indolent, that Vice now increased upon him, by
which means he lost the little School he had; so that neither his Wife nor
himself would have had any Bread to eat, had not the Charity of some good
Christian interposed, and provided them with what was just sufficient for their
Sustenance.

As this Support was conveyed to them by an unknown Hand, they imagined, and
so, I doubt not, will the Reader, that Mr. Allworthy himself was their secret
Benefactor; who, though he would not openly encourage Vice, could yet privately
relieve the Distresses of the Vicious themselves, when these became too
exquisite and disproportionate to their Merit. In which Light, their
Wretchedness appeared now to Fortune herself; for she at length took pity on
this miserable Couple, and considerably lessened the wretched State of
Partridge, by putting a final end to that of his Wife, who soon after caught
the Smallpox, and died.

The Justice which Mr. Allworthy had executed on Partridge, at first met with
universal Approbation; but no sooner had he felt its Consequences, than his
Neighbors began to relent, and to compassionate his Case; and presently after,
to blame that as Rigor and Severity, which they before called Justice. They
now exclaimed against punishing in cold Blood, and sang forth the Praises of
Mercy and Forgiveness.

These Cries were considerably increased by the Death of Mrs. Partridge, which,
though owing to the Distemper above mentioned, which is no Consequence of Poverty
or Distress, many were not ashamed to impute to Mr. Allworthy's Severity, or,
as they now termed it, Cruelty.

Partridge, having now lost his Wife, his School, and his Annuity, and the
unknown Person having now discontinued the last mentioned Charity, resolved to
change the Scene, and left the Country, where he was in Danger of starving with
the universal Compassion of all his Neighbors.

CHAP. VII.
A short Sketch of that Felicity which prudent Couples may extract from Hatred;
with a short Apology for those People who overlook Imperfections in their
Friends.

THOUGH the Captain had effectually demolished poor Partridge, yet had he not
reaped the Harvest he hoped for, which was to turn the Foundling out of Mr.
Allworthy's House.

On the contrary, that Gentleman grew every Day fonder of little Tommy, as if
he intended to counterbalance his Severity to the Father with extraordinary
Fondness and Affection toward the Son.

This a good deal soured the Captain's Temper, as did all the other daily
Instances of Mr. Allworthy's Generosity: For he looked on all such Largesses to
be Diminutions of his own Wealth.

In this, we have said, he did not agree with his Wife; nor indeed, in any
thing else: For though an Affection placed on the Understanding is by many wife
Persons thought much more durable than that which is founded on Beauty, yet it
happened otherwise in the present Case. Nay, the Understandings of this Couple
were their principal Bone of Contention, and one great Cause of many Quarrels
which from time to time arose between them; and which at last ended, on the
Side of the Lady, in a sovereign Contempt for her Husband, and on the
Husband's, in an utter Abhorrence of his Wife.

As these had both exercised their Talents chiefly in the Study of Divinity,
this was, from their first Acquaintance, the most common Topic of Conversation
between them. The Captain, like a well-bred Man, had, before Marriage, always
given up his Opinion to that of the Lady; and this, not in the clumsy, awkward
Manner of a conceited Blockhead, who' while he civilly yields to a Superior in
an Argument, is desirous of being still known to think himself in the Right.
The Captain, on the contrary, though one of the proudest Fellows in the World, so
absolutely yielded the Victory to his Antagonist, that she, who had not the
least Doubt of his Sincerity, retired always from the Dispute with an
Admiration of her own Understanding, and a Love for his.

But though this Complaisance to one whom the Captain thoroughly despised, was
not so uneasy to him, as it would have been, had any Hopes of Preferment made
it necessary to show the same Submission to a Hoadley, or to some other of
great Reputation in the Science, yet even this cost him too much to be endured
without some Motive. Matrimony, therefore, having removed all such Motives, he
grew weary of this Condescension, and began to treat the Opinions of his Wife
with that Haughtiness and Insolence, which none but those who deserve some
Contempt themselves can bestow, and those only who deserve no Contempt can bear.

When the first Torrent of Tenderness was over, and when in the calm and long
Interval between the Fits, Reason began to open the Eyes of the Lady, and she
saw this Alteration of Behavior in the Captain, who at length answered all her
Arguments only with Pish and Pshaw, she was far from enduring the Indignity
with a tame Submission. Indeed, it at first so highly provoked her, that it
might have produced some tragical Event, had it not taken a more harmless Turn,
by filling her with the utmost Contempt for her Husband's Understanding, which
somewhat qualified her Hatred toward him; though of this likewise, she had a
pretty moderate Share.

The Captain's Hatred to her was of a purer Kind: For as to any Imperfections
in her Knowledge or Understanding, he no more despised her for them than for
her not being six Feet high. In his Opinion of the female Sex, he exceeded the
Moroseness of Aristotle himself. He looked on a Woman as on an Animal of
domestic Use, of somewhat higher Consideration than a Cat, since her Offices
were of rather more Importance; but the Difference between these two, was in
his Estimation so small, that in his Marriage contracted with Mr. Allworthy's
Lands and Tenements, it would have been pretty equal which of them he had taken
into the Bargain. And yet so tender was his Pride, that it felt the Contempt
which his Wife now began to express toward him; and this, added to the Surfeit
he had before taken of her Love, created in him a Degree of Disgust and
Abhorrence, perhaps hardly to be exceeded.

One Situation only of the married State is excluded from Pleasure; and that
is, a State of Indifference; but as many of my Readers, I hope, know what an
exquisite Delight there is in conveying Pleasure to a beloved Object, so some
few, I am afraid, may have experienced the Satisfaction of tormenting one we
hate. It is, I apprehend, to come at this latter Pleasure, that we see both
Sexes often give up that Ease in Marriage, which they might otherwise possess,
though their Mate was never so disagreeable to them. Hence the Wife often puts on
Fits of Love and Jealousy, nay, even denies herself any Pleasure, to disturb
and prevent those of her Husband; and he again, in return, puts frequent
Restraints on himself, and stays at home in Company which he dislikes, in order
to confine his Wife to what she equally detests. Hence too must flow those
Tears which a Widow sometimes so plentifully sheds over the Ashes of a Husband
with whom she led a Life of constant Disquiet and Turbulency, and whom now she
can never hope to torment any more.

But if ever any Couple enjoyed this Pleasure, it was at present experienced by
the Captain and his Lady. It was always a sufficient Reason to either of them
to be obstinate in any Opinion, that the other had previously asserted the
contrary. If the one proposed any Amusement, the other constantly objected to
it. They never loved or hated, commended or abused the same Person. And for
this Reason, as the Captain looked with an evil Eye on the little Foundling,
his Wife began now to caress it almost equally with her own Child.

The Reader will be apt to conceive, that this Behavior between the Husband
and Wife did not greatly contribute to Mr. Allworthy's Repose, as it tended so
little to that serene Happiness which he had proposed to all three, from this
Alliance; but the Truth is, though he might be a little disappointed in his
sanguine Expectations, yet he was far from being acquainted with the whole
Matter: For, as the Captain was, from certain obvious Reasons, much on his
Guard before him, the Lady was obliged, for fear of her Brother's Displeasure,
to pursue the same Conduct. In fact, it is possible for a third Person to be
very intimate, nay even to live long in the same House, with a married Couple,
who have any tolerable Discretion, and not even guess at the four Sentiments
which they bear to each other: For though the whole Day may be sometimes too
short for Hatred, as well as for Love: yet the many Hours which they naturally
spend together, apart from all Observers, supply People of tolerable Moderation
with such ample Opportunity for the Enjoyment of either Passion, that, if they
love, they can support being a few Hours in Company, without toying, or if they
hate, without spitting in each others Faces.

It is possible, however, that Mr. Allworthy saw enough to render him a little
uneasy; for we are not always to conclude, that a wise Man is not hurt, because
he does not cry out and lament himself, like those of a childish or effeminate
Temper. But indeed it is possible he might see some Faults in the Captain,
without any Uneasiness at all: For Men of true Wisdom and Goodness are
contented to take Persons and Things as they are, without complaining of their
Imperfections, or attempting to amend them. They can see a Fault in a Friend, a
Relation, or an Accquaintance, without ever mentioning it to the Parties
themselves, or any others; and this often without the least lessening their
Affection. Indeed unless great Discernment be tempered with this overlooking
Disposition, we ought never to contract Friendship but with a Degree of Folly
which we can deceive: For I hope my Friends will pardon me, when I declare I
know none of them without a Fault; and I should be sorry if I could imagine I
had any Friend who could not see mine. Forgiveness, of this Kind, we give and
demand in Turn. It is an Exercise of Friendship, and, perhaps, none of the
least pleasant. And this Forgiveness we must bestow, without Desire of
Amendment. There is, perhaps, no surer Mark of Folly, than an Attempt to
correct the natural Infirmities of those we love. The finest Composition of
human Nature, as well as the finest China, may have a Flaw in it; and this, I
am afraid, in either Case, is equally incurable; though, nevertheless, the
Pattern may remain of the highest Value.

Upon the whole then, Mr. Allworthy certainly saw some Imperfections in the
Captain; but, as this was a very artful Man, and eternally upon his Guard
before him, these appeared to him no more than Blemishes in a good Character,
which his Goodness made him overlook, and his Wisdom prevented him from
discovering to the Captain himself. Very different would have been his
Sentiments, had he discovered the whole; which, perhaps, would, in Time, have
been the Case, had the Husband and Wife long continued this Kind of Behavior
to each other; but this kind Fortune took effectual Means to prevent, by
forcing the Captain to do that which rendered him again dear to his Wife, and
restored all her Tenderness and Affection toward him.

CHAP. VIII.
A Receipt to regain the lost Affections of a Wife, which has never been known
to fail in the most desperate Cases.

THE Captain was made large Amends for the unpleasant Minutes which he passed
in the Conversation of his Wife (and which were as few as he could contrive to
make them) by the pleasant Meditations he enjoyed when alone.

These Meditations were entirely employed on Mr. Allworthy's Fortune; for
first, he exercised much Thought in calculating, as well as he could, the exact
Value of the whole; which Calculations he often saw Occasion to alter in his
own Favor: And secondly, and chiefly, he pleased himself with intended
Alterations in the House and Gardens, and in projecting many other Schemes, as
well for Improvement of the Estate, as of the Grandeur of the Place. For this
Purpose he applied himself to the Studies of Architecture and Gardening, and
read over many Books on both those Subjects; for these Sciences, indeed,
employed his whole Time, and formed his only amusement. He at last completed a
most excellent Plan; and very sorry we are, that it is not in our Power to
present it to our Reader, since even the Luxury of the present Age, I believe
would hardly match it. It had, indeed, in a superlative Degree, the two
principal Ingredients which serve to recommend all great and noble Designs of
this Nature: For it required an immoderate Expense to execute, and a vast
Length of Time to bring it to any Sort of Perfection. The former of these, the
immense Wealth of which the Captain supposed Mr. Allworthy possessed, and which
he thought himself sure of inheriting, promised very effectually to supply; and
the latter, the Soundness of his own Constitution, and his Time of Life, which
was only what is called Middle Age, removed all Apprehension of his not living
to accomplish.

Nothing was wanting to enable him to enter upon the immediate Execution of
this Plan, but the Death of Mr. Allworthy; in calculating which he had employed
much of his own Algebra; besides purchasing every Book extant that treats of
the Value of Lives, Reversions, etc. From all which, he satisfied himself, that
as he had every Day a Chance of this happening, so had he more than an even
Chance of its happening within a few Years.

But while the Captain was one Day busied in deep Contemplations of this Kind,
one of the most unlucky as well as unseasonable Accidents, happened to him. The
utmost Malice of Fortune could indeed have contrived nothing so cruel, so
mal-a-propos, so absolutely destructive to all his Schemes. In short, not to
keep the Reader in long Suspense, just at the very Instant when his Heart was
exulting in Meditations o^ the Happiness which would accrue to him by Mr.
Allworthy's Death, he himself -- died of an Apoplexy.

This unfortunately befell the Captain as he was taking his Evening Walk by
himself, so that no Body was present to lend him any Assistance, if indeed any
Assistance could have preserved him. He took, therefore, Measure of that
Proportion of Soil, which was now become adequate to all his future Purposes,
and he lay dead on the Ground, a great (though not a living) Example of the
Truth of that Observation of Horace:

'Tu secanda marmora
'Locas sub ipsum funus: et sepulchri
'Immemor, struis domos.
Which Sentiment, I shall thus give to the English Reader: 'You provide the
noblest Materials for Building, when a Pick-ax and a Spade are only necessary;
and build Houses of five hundred by a hundred Feet, forgetting that of six by
two.'

CHAP. IX.
A Proof of the Infallibility of the foregoing Receipt, in the Lamentations of
the Widow; with other suitable Decorations of Death, such as Physicians, etc.
and an Epitaph in the true Style.

MR. Allworthy, his Sister, and another Lady, were assembled at the accustomed
Hour in the Supper Room, where having waited a considerable Time longer than
usual, Mr. Allworthy first declared ^e began to grow uneasy at the Captain's
Stay; (for he was always most punctual at his Meals,) and gave Orders that the
Bell should be rung without the Doors, and especially toward those Walks which
the Captain was wont to use.

All these Summons proving ineffectual, (for the Captain had, by perverse
Accident, betaken himself ^^ a new Walk that Evening,) Mrs. Blifil declared she
was seriously frightened. Upon which the other Lady, who was one of her most
intimate Acquaintance, and who well knew the true State of her Affections,
endeavored all she could to pacify her; telling her -- so be sure she could
not help being uneasy; but that she should hope the best. That, perhaps, the
Sweetness of the Evening had enticed the Captain to go farther than his usual
Walk, or he might be detained at some Neighbor's. Mrs. Blifil answered, No;
she was are some Accident had befallen him; for that he would never stay out
without sending her Word, as ^e must know how uneasy it would make her. The
other Lady, having no other Arguments to use, betook herself to the Entreaties
usual on such Occasions, and begged her not to frighten herself, for it might
be of very ill Consequence to her own Health; and, filling out a very large
Glass of Wine, advised, and at last prevailed with her to drink it.

Mr. Allworthy now returned into the Parlour; for he had been himself in Search
after the Captain. His Countenance sufficiently showed the Consternation he was
under, which indeed had a good deal deprived him of Speech; but as Grief
operates variously on different ^linds, so the same Apprehension which
depressed his Voice, elevated that of Mrs. Blifil. She now began to bewail
herself in very bitter Terms, and Floods of Tears accompanied her Lamentations,
which the Lady, her Companion, declared she could not blame; ^ut at the same
Time dissuaded her from indulging; attempting to moderate the Grief of her
Friend, by philosophical Observations on the many Disappointments to which
human Life is daily subject, which she said, was a sufficient Consideration to
fortify on Minds against any Accidents, how sudden or terrible soever. She
said, her Brother's Example ought to teach her Patience, who, though indeed he
could not be supposed as much concerned as herself, yet was doubtless very
uneasy, though his Resignation to the Divine Will had restrained his Grief
within due Bounds. 'Mention not my Brother,' said Mrs. Blifil, 'alone am the
Object of your Pity. What are the Terrors of Friendship to what a Wife feels on
these Occasions? O he is lost! Somebody has murdered him -- I shall never see
him more' -- Here Torrent of Tears had the same Consequence with what the
Suppression had occasioned to Mr. Allworthy and she remained silent.

At this Interval, a Servant came running in, ou^ of Breath, and cried out, the
Captain was found; and, before he could proceed farther, he was followed by two
more, bearing the dead Body between them.

Here the curious Reader may observe, another Diversity in the Operations of
Grief: For as Mr. Allworthy had been before silent, from the same Cause which
had made his Sister vociferous; so did the present Sight, which drew Tears from
the Gentleman, put an entire Stop to those of the Lady; who first gave a
violent Scream, and presently after fell into a Fit.

The Room was soon full of Servants, some of whom, with the Lady visitant, were
employed in Care of the Wife, and others, with Mr. Allworthy, assisted in
carrying off the Captain to a warm Bed, where every Method was tried, in order
to restore him to Life.

And glad should we be, could we inform the Reader at both these Bodies had
been attended with equal ^ccess; for those who undertook the Care of the ^dy,
succeeded so well, that after the Fit had con^ued a decent Time, she again
revived, to their great ^atisfaction; but as to the Captain, all Experiments
bleeding, chafing, dropping, etc. proved ineffc^l. Death, that inexorable
Judge, had passed Sen^ce on him, and refused to grant him a Reprieve, ^ugh two
Doctors who arrived, and were fee'd at ^e and the same Instant, were his
Council.

These two Doctors, whom, to avoid any malicious ^pplications, we shall
distinguish by the Names of Dr. ^ and Dr. Z. having felt his Pulse: to wit, Dr.
Y. ^s right Arm, and Dr. Z. his left, both agreed that he ^as absolutely dead;
but as to the Distemper, or Cause ^^ his Death, they differed, D. Y. holding
that he ^^d died of an Apoplexy, and Dr. Z. of an Epilepsy. Hence arose a
Dispute between the learned Men, which each delivered the Reasons of their
several Opinions. These were of such equal Force, that they served ^^th to
confirm either Doctor in his own Sentiments, and made not the least Impression
on his Adversary. To say the Truth, every Physician, almost, has ^s favorite
Disease, to which he ascribes all the Vic^ies obtained over human Nature. The
Gout, the ^eumatism, the Stone, the Gravel, and the Consump^n, have all their
several Patrons in the Faculty; and one more than the nervous Fever, or the
Fever on the ^pirits. And here we may account for those Disagree^ents in
Opinion, concerning the Cause of a Pati^t's Death; which sometimes occur
between the ^ost learned of the College; and which have greatly ^^rprized that
Part of the World who have been ignorant of the Fact we have above asserted.

The Reader may, perhaps, be surprised, that in^ad of endeavoring to revive
the Patient, the learned ^entlemen should fall immediately into a Dispute on
the Occassion of his Death; but in reality, all such Experiments had been made
before their Arrival: For the Captain was put into a warm Bed, had his Vei^
scarified, his Forehead chafed, and all Sorts of stro^^ Drops applied to his
Lips and his Nostrils.

The Physicians, therefore, finding themselves anticipated in every thing they
ordered, were at a Los^ how to employ that Portion of Time which it is use sual
and decent to remain for their Fee, and were necessitated to find some Subject
or other for Discourse; and what could more naturally present itself than that
beforementioned?

Our Doctors were about to take their Leave when Mr. Allworthy, having given
over the Captain and acquiesced in the divine Will, began to enquir^ after his
Sister, whom he desired them to visit before their departure.

This Lady was now recovered of her Fit, and, to use the common Phrase, as well
as could be expected for one in her Condition. The Doctors therefore all
previous Ceremonies being complied with, as this was a new Patient, attended
according to desire, and laid hold on each of her Hands, as they had before
done on those of the Corpse.

The Case of the Lady was in the other Extreme from that of her Husband; for as
he was past all the Assistance of Physic, so, in reality, she required none.

There is nothing more unjust, than the Vulgar Opinion by which Physicians are
misrepresented, a^ Friends to Death. On the contrary, I believe, i^ the Number
of those who recover by Physic could be opposed to that of the Martyrs to it,
the former would rather exceed the latter. Nay, some are so cautious on this
Head, that, to avoid a Possibility of killing the Patient, they abstain from
all Methods of curing, and prescribe nothing but what can neither do good nor
harm: I have heard some of these, with great Gravity, deliver it as a Maxim,
that Nature should be left to do her own Work, while the Physician stands by,
as it were to clap her ^n the Back, and encourage her when she does well.

So little then did our Doctors delight in Death, ^^at they discharged the
Corpse after a single Fee; ^ut they were not so disgusted with their living
Pati^^t; concerning whose Case they immediately a^reed, and fell to prescribing
with great Diligence.

Whether, as the Lady had at first persuaded her Phy^^cians to believe her ill,
they had now, in return, per^aded her to believe herself so, I will not
determine; ^ut she continued a whole Month with all the Deco^tions of Sickness.
During this Time she was vi^^ted by Physicians, attended by Nurses, and
received ^onstant Messages from her Acquaintance, to enquire after her Health.

At length, the decent Time for Sickness and immoderate Grief being expired,
the Doctors were discharged, and the Lady began to see Company; being ^^tered
only from what she was before by that Color of Sadness in which she had
dressed her Person and Countenance.

The Captain was now interred, and might perhaps, have already made a large
Progress toward Oblivion, had not the Friendship of Mr. Allworthy taken Care
to preserve his Memory, by the following Epitaph, which was written by a Man of
as great Genius as Integrity, and one who perfectly knew the Captain.

Here lies, In Expectation of a joyful Rising, The Body of Captain JOHN BLIFIL.
LONDON had the Honor of his Birth, OXFORD of his Education. His Parts were an
Honor to his Profession and to his Country. His Life to his Religion and human
Nature. He was a dutiful Son, a tender Husband, an affectionate Father, a
sincere Friend, a devout Christian, and a good Man. His inconsolable Widow has
erected this Stone, The Monument of His Virtues, and of Her Affection.

THE HISTORY OF A FOUNDLING.
BOOK III.
Containing the most memorable Transactions which passed in the Family of Mr.
Allworthy, from the Time when Tommy Jones arrived at the Age of Fourteen, till
he attained the Age of Seventeen. In this Book the Reader may pick up some
Hints concerning the Education of Children.

CHAP. I.
Containing little or nothing.

THE Reader will be well pleased to remember, that at the Beginning of the
Second Book of this History, we gave him a Hint of our Intention to pass over
several large Periods of Time, in which nothing happened worthy of being
recorded in a Chronicle of this Kind.

In so doing, we do not only consult our own Dignity and Ease; but the Good and
Advantage of the Reader: For besides, that by these Means we prevent him from
throwing away his Time in reading without either Pleasure or Emolument, we gave
him at all such Seasons an Opportunity of employing that wonderful Sagacity, of
which he is Master, by filling up these vacant Spaces of Time with his own
Conjectures; for which Purpose, we have taken care to qualify him in the
preceding Pages.

For Instance, what Reader but knows that Mr. Allworthy felt at first for the
Loss of his Friend, those Emotions of Grief, which on such Occasions enter into
all Men whose Hearts are not composed of Flint, or their Heads of as solid
Materials? Again, what Reader does not know that Philosophy and Religion, in
time, moderated, and at last extinguished this Grief? The former of these,
teaching the Folly and Vanity of it, and the latter, correcting it, as
unlawful, and at the same time assuaging it by raising future Hopes and
Assurances which enable a strong and religious Mind to take leave of a Friend
on his Deathbed with little less indifference than if he was preparing for a
long Journey; and indeed with little less Hope of seeing him again.

Nor can the judicious Reader be at a greater Loss on Account of Mrs. Bridget
Blifil, who, he may be assured, conducted herself through the whole Season in
which Grief is to make its Appearance on the outside of the Body, with the
strictest Regard to all the Rules of Custom and Decency, suiting the
Alterations of her Countenance to the several Alterations of her Habit: For as
this changed from Weeds to Black, from Black to Gray, from Gray to White, so
did her Countenance change from Dismal to Sorrowful, from Sorrowful to Sad, and
from Sad to Serious, till the Day came in which she was allowed to return to
her former Serenity.

We have mentioned these two as Examples only of the Task which may be imposed
on Readers of the lowest Class. Much higher and harder Exercises of Judgment
and Penetration may reasonably be expected from the upper Graduates in
Criticism. Maby notable Discoveries will, I doubt not, be made by such, of the
Transactions which happened in the Family of our worthy Man, during all the
Years which we have thought proper to pass over: For though nothing worthy of a
Place in this History occurred within that Period; yet did several Incidents
happen, of equal Importance with those reported by the daily and Weekly
Historians of the Age, in reading which, great Numbers of Persons consume a
considerable Part of their Time, very little, I am afraid, to their Emolument.
Now, in the Conjectures here proposed, some of the most excellent Faculties of
the Mind may be employed to much Advantage, since it is a more useful Capacity
to be able to foretell the Actions of Men in any Circumstance from their
Characters; than to judge of their Characters from their Actions. The former, I
own, requires the greater Penetration; but may be accomplished by true
Sagacity, with no less certainty than the latter.

As we are sensible that much the greatest Part of our Readers are very
eminently possessed of this Quality, we have left them a Space of twelve Years
to exert it in; and shall now bring forth our Hero, at about fourteen Years of
Age, not questioning that many have been long impatient to be introduced to his
Acquaintance.

CHAP. II.
The Hero of this great History appears with very bad Omens. A little Tale, of
so LOW a Kind, that some may think it not worth their Notice. A Word or two
concerning a Squire, and more relating to a Game-keeper and a Schoolmaster.

AS we determined when we first sat down to write this History, to flatter no
Man; but to guide our Pen throughout by the Directions of Truth, we are obliged
to bring our Hero on the Stage in a much more disadvantageous Manner than we
could wish; and to declare honestly, even at his first Appearance, that it was
the universal Opinion of all Mr. Allworthy's Family, that he was certainly born
to be hanged.

Indeed, I am sorry to say, there was too much Reason for this Conjecture. The
Lad having, from his earliest Years, discovered a Propensity to many Vices, and
especially to one, which has as direct a Tendency as any other to that Fate,
which we have just now observed to have been prophetically denounced against
him. He had been already convicted of three Robberies, viz. of robbing an
Orchard, of stealing a Duck out of a Farmer's Yard, and of picking Master
Blifil's Pocket of a Ball.

The Vices of this young Man were moreover heightened by the disadvantageous
Light in which they appeared, when opposed to the Virtues of Master Blifil, his
Companion: A Youth of so different a Cast from little Jones, that not only the
Family, but all the Neighborhood resounded his Praises. He was indeed a Lad of
a remarkable Disposition; sober, discreet, and pious beyond his Age. Qualities,
which gained him the Love of every one who knew him, while Tom Jones was
universally disliked, and many expressed their Wonder that Mr. Allworthy would
suffer such a Lad to be educated with his Nephew, lest the Morals of the latter
should be corrupted by his Example.

An Incident which happened about this Time, will set the Characters of these
two Lads, more fairly before the discerning Reader, than is in the Power of the
longest Dissertation.

Tom Jones, who, bad as he is, must serve for the Hero of this History, had
only one Friend among all the Servants of the Family; for, as to Mrs. Wilkins,
she had long since given him up, and was perfectly reconciled to her Mistress.
This Friend was the Game-keeper, a Fellow of a loose kind of Disposition and
who was thought not to entertain much strict^^ Notions concerning the
Difference of meum and tuum, than the young Gentleman himself. And hence, this
Friendship gave Occasion to many sarcastical Remarks among the Domestics, most
of which were either Proverbs before, or at least are become so now; and
indeed, the Wit of them all may be comprised in that short I atin Proverb,
"Noscitur a socio," which I think, is thus expressed in English, "You may know
him by the Company he keeps."

To say the Truth, some of that atrocious Wickedness in Jones, of which we have
just mentioned three Examples, might perhaps be derived from the Encouragement
he had received from this Fellow, who, in two or three Instances, had been what
the Law calls an Accessory after the Fact. For the whole Duck, and great Part
of the Apples were converted to the Use of the Game-keeper and his Family. Though
as Jones alone was discovered, the poor Lad bore not only the whole Smart, but
the whole Blame; both which fell again to his Lot, on the following Occasion.
Contiguous to Mr. Allworthy's Estate, was the Manor of one of those Gentlemen,
who are called Preservers of the Game. This Species of Men, from the great
Severity with which they revenge the Death of a Hare or a Partridge, might be
thought to cultivate the same Superstition with the Bannians in India; many of
whom, we are told, dedicate their whole Lives to the Preservation and
Protection of certain Animals, was it not that our English Bannians, while they
preserve them from other Enemies, will most unmercifully slaughter whole
Horse-loads themselves, so that they stand clearly acquitted of any such
heathenish Superstition.

I have indeed, a much better Opinion of this Kind of Men than is entertained
by some, as I take them to answer the Order of Nature, and the good Purposes
for which they were ordained in a more ample Manner than many others. Now, as
Horace tells us, that there are a set of human Beings,

'Fruges consumere nati 'Born to consume the Fruits of the Earth.' So, I make
no manner of Doubt but that there are others

'Feras consumere nati. 'Born to consume the Beasts of the Field,' or, as it is
commonly called, the Game; and none I believe, will deny, but that those
Squires fulfill this End of their Creation.

Little Jones went one Day a shooting with the Game-keeper; when, happening to
spring a Covey of Partridges, near the Border of that Manor, over which
Fortune, to fulfill the wise Purposes of Nature, had planted one of the
Game-Consumers, the Birds flew into it, and were marked (as it is called) by
the two Sportsmen, in some Furze Bushes, about two or three hundred Paces
beyond Mr. Allworthy's Dominions.

Mr. Allworthy had given the Fellow strict Orders, on Pain of forfeiting his
Place, never to trespass on any of his Neighbors, no more on those who were
less rigid in this Matter, than on the Lord of this Manor. With regard to
others, indeed, these Orders had not been always very scrupulously kept; but as
the Disposition of the Gentleman with whom the Partridges had taken sauctuary,
was well known, the Game-keeper had never yet attempted to invade his
Territories. Nor had he done it now, had not the younger Sportsman, who was so
excessively eager to pursue the flying Game, over-persuaded him; but Jones
being very importunate, the other, who was himself keen enough after the Sport,
yielded to his Persuasions, entered the Manor, and shot one of the Partridges.

The Gentleman himself was at that time on horseback, at a little Distance from
them; and hearing the Gun go off, he immediately made toward the Place, and
discovered poor Tom: For the Game-keeper had leapt into the thickest Part of
the Furze-brake, where he had happily concealed himself.

The Gentleman having searched the Lad, and found the Partridge upon him,
denounced great Vengeance, swearing he would acquaint Mr. Allworthy. He was as
good as his Word, for he rode immediately to his House, and complained of the
Trespass on his Manor, in as high Terms, and as bitter Language, as if his
House had been broken open, and the most valuable Furniture stole out of it. He
added, that some other Person was in his Company, though he could not discover
him: for that two Guns had been discharged almost in the same Instant. And,
says he, 'we have found only this Partridge, but the Lord knows what Mischief
they have done.'

At his Return home, Tom was presently convened before Mr. Allworthy. He owned
the Fact, and alleged no other Excuse but what was really true, viz. that the
Covey was originally sprung in Mr. Allworthy's own Manor.

Tom was then interrogated who was with him, which Mr. Allworthy declared he
was resolved to know, acquainting the Culprit with the Circumstance of the two
Guns, which had been deposed by the Squire and both his Servants; but Tom
stoutly persisted in asserting that he was alone; yet, to say the Truth, he
hesitated a little at first, which would have confirmed Mr. Allworthy's Belief,
had what the Squire and his Servants said, wanted any further Confirmation.

The Game-keeper being a suspected Person, was now sent for, and the Question
put to him; but he, relying on the Promise which Tom had made him, to take all
upon himself, very resolutely denied being in Company with the young Gentleman,
or indeed having seen him the whole Afternoon.

Mr. Allworthy then turned toward Tom, with more than usual Anger in his
Countenance, and advised him to confess who was with him; repeating, that he
was resolved to know. The Lad, however, still maintained his Resolution, and
was dismissed with much Wrath by Mr. Allworthy, who told him, he should have to
the next Morning to consider of it, when he should be questioned by another
Person and in another Manner.

Poor Jones spent a very melancholy Night, and the more so, as he was without
his usual Companion: for Master Blifil was gone abroad on a visit with his
Mother. Fear of the Punishment he was to suffer was on this Occasion his least
Evil; his chief Anxiety being, lest his Constancy should fail him, and he
should be brought to betray the Game-keeper, whose Ruin he knew must now be the
Consequence.

Nor did the Game-keeper pass his Time much better. He had the same
Apprehensions with the Youth; for whose Honor he had likewise a much tenderer
Regard than for his Skin.

In the Morning, when Tom attended the Reverend Mr. Thwackum, the Person to
whom Mr. Allworthy had committed the Instruction of the two Boys, he had the
same Questions put to him by that Gentleman, which he had been asked the
Evening before, to which he returned the same Answers. The Consequence of this
was, so severe a Whipping, that it possibly fell little short of the Torture
with which Confessions are in some Countries extorted from Criminals.

Tom bore his Punishment with great Resolution; and though his Master asked him
between every Stroke, whether he would not confess, he was contented to be
flead rather than betray his Friend, or break the Promise he had made.

The Game-keeper was now relieved from his Anxiety, and Mr. Allworthy himself
began to be concerned at Tom's Sufferings: For, besides that Mr. Thwackum,
being highly enraged that he was not able to make the Boy say what he himself
pleased, had carried his Severity much beyond the good Man's Intention, this
latter began now to suspect that the Squire had been mistaken; which his
Extreme Eagerness and Anger seemed to make probable; and as for what the
Servants had said in Confirmation of their Master's Account, he laid no great
Stress upon that. Now, as Cruelty and Injustice were two Ideas, of which Mr.
Allworthy could by no Means support the Consciousness a single Moment, he sent
for Tom, and after many kind and Friendly Exhortations, said, 'I am convinced,
my dear Child, that my Suspicions have wronged you; I am sorry that you have
been so severely punished on this Account.' -- And at last gave him a little
Horse to make him amends; again repeating his Sorrow for what had past.

Tom's Guilt now flew in his Face more than any Severity could make it. He
could more easily bear the Lashes of Thwackum, than the Generosity of
Allworthy. The Tears burst from his Eyes, and he fell upon his Knees, crying,
'Oh! Sir, you are too good to me. Indeed, you are. Indeed, I don't deserve it.'
And at that very Instant, from the Fullness of his Heart, had almost betrayed
the Secret; but the good Genius of the Game-keeper suggested to him what might
be the Consequence to the poor Fellow, and this Consideration sealed his Lips.

Thwackum did all he could to dissuade Allworthy from showing any Compassion or
Kindness to the Boy, saying, 'He had persisted in an Untruth;' and gave some
Hints, that a second Whipping might probably bring the Matter to Light.

But Mr. Allworthy absolutely refused to consent to the Experiment. He said,
the Boy had suffered enough already, for concealing the Truth, even if he was
guilty, seeing that he could have no Motive but a mistaken Point of Honor for
so doing.

Honor! cried Thwackum, with some Warmth, mere Stubborness and Obstinacy! Can
Honor teach any one to tell a Lie, or can any Honor exist independent of
Religion?

This Discourse happened at Table when Dinner was just ended; and there were
present Mr. Allworthy, Mr. Thwackum, and a third Gentleman who entered into the
Debate, and whom, before we proceed any farther, we shall briefly introduce to
our Reader's Acquaintance.

CHAP. III.
The Character of Mr. Square the Philosopher, and of Mr. Thwackum the Divine;
with a Dispute concerning --

THE Name of this Gentleman who had then resided some time at Mr. Allworthy's
House, was Mr. Square. His natural Parts were not of the first Rate, but he had
greatly improved them by a learn Education. He was deeply read in the Ancients,
and a professed Master of all the Works of Plato and Aristotle. Upon which great
Models he had principally formed himself, sometimes according with the Opinion
of the one, and sometimes with that of the other. In Morals he was a professed
Platonist, and in Religion he inclined to be an Aristotelian.

But though he had, as we have said, formed his Morals on the Platonic Model, yet
he perfectly agreed with the Opinion of Aristotle, in considering that great
Man rather in the Quality of a Philosopher or a Speculatist, than as a
Legislator. This Sentiment he carried a great way; indeed, so far, as to regard
all Virtue as Matter of Theory only. This, it is true, he never affirmed, as I
have heard, to any one; and yet upon the least attention to his Conduct, I
cannot help thinking, it was his real Opinion, as it will perfectly reconcile
some Contradictions which might otherwise appear in his Character.

This Gentleman and Mr. Thwackum scarce ever met without a Disputation; for
their Tenets were, indeed, diametrically opposite to each other. Square held
human Nature to be the Perfection of all Virtue, and that Vice was a Deviation
from our Nature in the same Manner as Deformity of Body is. Thwackum, on the
contrary, maintained that the human Mind, since the fall, was nothing but a
Sink of Iniquity, till purified and redeemed by Grace. In one Point only they
agreed, which was, in all their Discourses on Morality never to mention the
Word Goodness. The favorite Phrase of the former, was the natural Beauty of
Virtue; that of the latter, was the divine Power of Grace. The former measured
all Actions by the unalterable Rule of Right, and the eternal Fitness of
Things; the latter decided all Matters by Authority; but, in doing this, he
always used the Scriptures and their Commentators, as the Lawyer does his Coke
upon Lyttleton, where the Comment is of equal Authority with the Text.

After this short Introduction, the Reader will be pleased to remember, that
the Parson had concluded his Speech with a triumphant Question, to which he had
apprehended no Answer; viz. Can any Honor exist independent on Religion?

To this Square answered, that it was impossible to discourse philosophically
concerning Words, till their Meaning was first established; that there were
scarce any two Words of a more vague and uncertain Signification, than the two
he had mentioned: For that there were almost as many different Opinions
concerning Honor as concerning Religion. 'But, says he, if by Honor you mean
the true natural Beauty of Virtue, I will maintain it may exist independent of
any Religion whatever. Nay (added he) you yourself will allow it may exist
independent of all but one; so will a Mohammedan, a Jew, and all the Maintainers
of all the different Sects in the World.'

Thwackum replied, This was arguing with the usual Malice of all the Enemies to
the true Church. He said, he doubted not but that all the Infidels and
Heretics in the World would, if they could, confine Honor to their own absurd
Errors, and damnable Deceptions; 'But Honor, says he, is not therefore
manifold, because there are many absurd Opinions about it; nor is Religion
manifold, because there are various Sects and Heresies in the World. When I
mention Religion, I mean the Christian Religion; and not only the Christian
Religion, but the Protestant Religion; and not only the Protestant Religion,
but the Church of England. And, when I mention Honor, I mean that Mode of
divine Grace which is not only consistent with, but dependent upon, this
Religion; and is consistent with, and dependent upon, no other. Now to say that
the Honor I here mean, and which was, I thought, all the Honor I could be
supposed to mean, will uphold, much less dictate, an Untruth, is to assert an
Absurdity too shocking to be conceived.'

'I purposely avoided,' says Square, 'drawing a Conclusion which I thought
evident from what I have said; but if you perceived it, I am sure you have not
attempted to answer it. However, to drop the Article of Religion, I think it is
plain, from what you have said, that we have different Ideas of Honor; or why
do we not agree in the same Terms of its Explanation? I have asserted, that
true Honor and true Virtue are almost synonimous Terms, and they are both
founded on the unalterable Rule of Right, and the eternal Fitness of Things; to
which an Untruth being absolutely repugnant and contrary, it is certain that
true Honor cannot support an Untruth. In this, therefore, I think we are
agreed; but that this Honor, can be said to be founded on Religion, to which
it is antecedent, if by Religion be meant any positive Law -- 'I agree,'
answered Thwackum, with great 'Warmth, 'with a Man who asserts Honor to be
antecedent to Religion! -- Mr. Allworthy, did I agree --?

He was proceeding, when Mr. Allworthy interposed, telling them very coldly,
they had both mistaken his Meaning; for that he had said nothing of true
Honor. -- It is possible, however, he would not have easily quieted the
Disputants, who were growing equally warm, had not another Matter now fallen
out, which put a final End to the Conversation at present.

CHAP. IV.
Containing a necessary Apology for the Author; and a childish Incident, which
perhaps requires an Apology likewise.

BEFORE I proceed farther, I shall beg leave to obviate some Misconstructions,
into which the Zeal of some few Readers may lead them; for I would not
willingly give Offense to any, especially to Men who are warm in the Cause of
Virtue or Religion.

I hope, therefore, no Man will, by the grossest Misunderstanding, or
Perversion, of my Meaning, misrepresent me, as endeavoring to cast any
Ridicule on the greatest Perfections of Human Nature; and which do, indeed,
alone purify and ennoble the Heart of Man, and raise him above the Brute
Creation. This, Reader, I will venture to say, (and by how much the better Man
you are yourself, by so much the more will you be inclined to believe me) that
I would rather have buried the Sentiments of these two Persons in eternal
Oblivion, than have done any Injury to either of these glorious Causes.

On the contrary, it is with a View to their Service that I have taken upon me
to record the Lives and Actions of two of their false and pretended Champions.
A treacherous Friend is the most dangerous Enemy; and I will say boldly, that
both Religion and Virtue have received more real Discredit from Hypocrites,
than the wittiest Profligates or Infidels could ever cast upon them: Nay
farther, as these two, in their Purity, are rightly called the Bands of civil
Society, and are indeed the greatest of Blessings; so when poisoned and
corrupted with Fraud, Pretense and Affection, they have become the worst of
civil Curses, and have enabled Men to perpetrate the most cruel Mischiefs to
their own Species.

Indeed, I doubt not but this Ridicule will in general be allowed; my chief
Apprehensions is, as many true and just Sentiments often came from the Mouths
of these Persons, lest the whole should be taken together, and I should be
conceived to ridicule all alike. Now the Reader will be pleased to consider,
that as neither of these Men were Fools, they could not be supposed to have
holden none but wrong Principles, and to have uttered nothing but Absurdities;
what Injustice, therefore, must I have done to their Characters, had I selected
only what was bad, and how horridly wretched and maimed must their Arguments
have appeared!

Upon the whole, it is not Religion or Virtue, but the Want of them which is
here exposed. Had not Thwackum too much neglected Virtue, and Square Religion,
in the Composition of their several Systems; and had not both utterly discarded
all natural Goodness of Heart, they had never been represented as the Objects
of Derision in this History; in which we will now proceed.

This Matter, then, which put an end to the Debate mentioned in the last
Chapter, was no other than a Quarrel between Master Blifil and Tom Jones, the
Consequence of which had been a Bloody Nose to the former; for though Master
Blifil, notwithstanding he was the younger, was in Size above the other's
Match, yet Tom was much his Superior at the noble Art of Boxing.

Tom, however, cautiously avoided all Engagements with that Youth: For besides
that Tommy Jones was an inoffensive Lad amidst all his Roguery, and really
loved Blifil; Mr. Thwackum being always the Second of the latter, would have
been sufficient to deter him.

But well says a certain Author, No Man is wise at all Hours; it is therefore
no Wonder that a Boy is not so. A Difference arising at Play between the two
Lads, Master Blifil called Tom a Beggarly Bastard. Upon which the lattter, who
was somewhat passionate in his Disposition, immediately caused that Phenomenon
in the Face of the former, which we have above remembered.

Master Blifil now, with his Blood running from his Nose, and the Tears
galloping after from his Eyes, appeared before his Uncle, and the tremendous
Thwackum. In which Court an Indictment of Assault, Batterry, and wounding, was
instantly preserred against Tom; who in his Excuse only pleaded the
Provocation, which was indeed all the Matter that Master Blifil had omitted.

It is indeed possible, that this Circumstances might have escaped his Memory;
for, in his Reply, he positively insisted, that he made Use of no such
Appellation; adding, 'Heaven forbid such naughty Words should ever come out of
his Mouth.'

Tom, though against all Form of Law, rejoined in Affirmance of the Words. Upon
which Master Blifil said, 'It is no Wonder. Those who will tell one Fib, will
hardly stick at another. If I had told my Master such a wicked Fib as you have
done, I should be ashamed to show my Face.'

'What Fib, Child,' cries Thwackum pretty eagerly?

'Why he told you that Nobody was with him a shooting when he killed the
Partridge; but he knows, (here he burst into a Flood of Tears) yes, he knows;
for he confessed it to me, that Black Jack the Game-keeper was there. Nay, he
said, -- Yes you did, -- deny it if you can, That you would not have confessed
the Truth, though Master had cut you to Pieces.'

At this the Fire flashed from Thwackum's Eyes; and he cried out in Triumph:
'Oh ho! This is your mistaken Notion of Honor! This is the Boy who was not to
be whipped again!' But Mr. Allworthy, with a more gentle Aspect, turned toward
the Lad, and said, 'Is this true, Child? How came you to persist so obstinately
in a Falsehood?'

Tom said, 'He scorned a Lie as much as any one; but he thought his Honor
engaged him to act as he did; for he had promised the poor Fellow to conceal
him; which,' he said, 'he thought himself farther obliged to, as the
Game-keeper had begged him not to go into the Gentleman's Manor, and had at
last gone himself in Compliance with his Persuasions.' He said, this was the
whole Truth of the Matter, and he would take his Oath of it; and concluded with
very passionately begging Mr. Allworthy, 'to have Compassion on the poor
Fellow's Family, especially as he himself had been only guilty, and the other
had been very difficultly prevailed on to what he did.' 'Indeed Sir,' said he,
'it could hardly be called a Lie that I told; for the poor Fellow was entirely
innocent of the whole Matter. I should have gone alone after the Birds; nay, I
did go at first, and he only followed me to prevent more Mischief. Do, pray,
Sir, let me be punished, take my little Horse away again; but pray, Sir,
forgive poor George.'

Mr. Allworthy hesitated a few Moments, and then dismissed the Boys, advising
them to live more friendly and peaceably together.

CHAP. V.
The Opinion of the Divine and the Philosopher concerning the two Boys; with
some Reasons for their Opinions, and other Matters.

IT is probable, that by disclosing this Secret, which had been communicated in
the utmost Confidence to him, young Blifil preserved his Companion from a good
Lashing: For the Offense of the bloody Nose would have been of itself
sufficient Cause for Thwackum to have proceeded to Correction; but now this was
totally absorbed, in the Consideration of the other Matter; and with Regard to
this, Mr. Allworthy declared privately, he thought the Boy deserved Reward
rather than Punishment; so that Thwackum's Hand was withheld by a general
Pardon.

Thwackum, whose Meditations were full of Birch, exclaimed against this weak,
and, as he said he would venture to call it, wicked Lenity. To remit the
Punishment of such Crimes was, he said, to encourage them. He enlarged much on
the Correction of Children, and quoted many Texts from Solomon, and others;
which being to be found in so many other Books, shall not be found here. He
then applied himself to the Vice of Lying, on which Head he was altogether as
learned as he had been on the other.

Square said, he had been endeavoring to reconcile the Behavior of Tom with
his Idea of perfect Virtue; but could not. He owned there was something which
at first Sight appeared like Fortitude in the Action, but as Fortitude was a
Virtue, and Falsehood a Vice, they could by no means agree or unite together. He
added, that as this was in some measure to confound Virtue and Vice, it might
be worth Mr. Thwackum's Considerations, whether a larger Castigation might not
be laid on, upon that Account.

As both these learned Men concurred in censuring Jones, so were they no less
unanimous in applauding Master Blifil. To bring Truth to light, was by the
Parson asserted to be the Duty of every religious Man; and by the Philosopher
this was declared to be highly conformable with the Rule of Right, and the
eternal and unalterable Fitness of Things.

All this, however, weighed very little with Mr. Allworthy. He could not be
prevailed on to sign the Warrant for the Execution of Jones. There was
something within his own Breast with which the invincible Fidelity which that
Youth had preserved, corresponded much better than it had done with the
Religion of Thwackum, or with the Virtue of Square. He therefore strictly
ordered the former of these Gentlemen to abstain from laying violent Hands on
Tom for what had past. The Pedagogue was obliged to obey those Orders; but not
without great Reluctance, and frequent Mutterings, that the Boy would be
certainly spoiled.

Toward the Game-keeper the good Man behaved with more Severity. He presently
summoned that poor Fellow before him, and after many bitter Remonstrances, paid
him his Wages, and dismissed him from his Service; for Mr. Allworthy rightly
observed that there was great Difference between being guilty of a Falsehood to
excuse yourself, and to excuse another. He likewise urged, as the principal
Motive to his inflexible Severity against this Man, that he had basely suffered
Tom Jones to undergo so heavy a Punishment for his Sake, whereas he ought to
have prevented it by making the Discovery himself.

When this Story became public, many people differed from Square and Thwackum,
in judging the Conduct of the two Lads on the Occasion. Master Blifil was
generally called a sneaking Rascal, a poor-spirited Wretch; with other Epithets
of the like Kind; whilst Tom was honored with the Appellations of a brave Lad,
a Jolly Dog, and an honest Fellow. Indeed his Behavior to Black George much
ingratiated him with all the Servants; for though that Fellow was before
universally disliked, yet he was no sooner turned away than he was as
universally pitied; and the Friendship and Gallantry of Tom Jones was
celebrated by them all with the highest Applause; and they condemned Master
Blifil, as openly as they durst, without incurring the Danger of offending his
Mother. For all this, however, poor Tom smarted in the Flesh; for though
Thwackum had been inhibited to exercise his Arm on the foregoing Account; yet,
as the Proverb says, It is easy to find a Stick, etc. So was it easy to find a
Rod; and, indeed, the not being able to find one was the only thing which could
have kept Thwackum any long Time from chastising poor Jones.

Had the bare Delight in the Sport been the only Inducement to the Pedagogue,
it is probable, Master Blifil would likewise have had his Share; but though Mr.
Allworthy had given him frequent Orders to make no Difference between the Lads,
yet was Thwackum altogether as kind and gentle to this Youth, as he was harsh,
nay even barbarous, to the other. To say the Truth, Blifil had greatly gained
his Master's Affections; partly by the profound Respect he always showed his
Person, but much more by the decent Reverence with which he received his
Doctrine; for he had got by Heart, and frequently repeated his Phrases, and
maintained all his Master's religious Principles with a Zeal which was
surprising in one so young, and which greatly endeared him to the worthy
Preceptor.

Tom Jones, on the other hand, was not only deficient in outward Tokens of
Respect, often forgetting to pull off his Hat, or to bow at his Master's
Approach; but was altogether as unmindful both of his Master's Precepts and
Example. He was indeed a thoughtless, giddy Youth, with little Sobriety in his
Manners, and less in his Countenance; and would often very impudently and
indecently laugh at his Companion for his serious Behavior.

Mr. Square had the same Reason for his Preference of the former Lad; for Tom
Jones showed no more Regard to the learned Discourses which this Gentleman
would sometimes throw away upon him, than to those of Thwackum. He once
ventured to make a Jest of the Rule of Right; and at another Time said, He
believed there was no Rule in the World capable of making such a Man as his
Father, (for so Mr. Allworthy suffered himself to be called.)

Master Blifil, on the contrary, had Address enough at sixteen to recommend
himself at one and the same Time to both these Opposites. With one he was all
Religion, with the other he was all Virtue. And when both were present, he was
profoundly silent, which both interpreted in his Favor and their own.

Nor was Blifil contented with flattering both these Gentlemen to their Faces;
he took frequent Occasions of praising them behind their Backs to Allworthy;
before whom, when they were alone together, and when his Uncle commended any
religious or virtuous Sentiment (for many such came constantly from him) he
seldom failed to ascribe it to the good Instructions he had received from
either Thwackum or Square: For he knew his Uncle repeated all such Compliments
to the Persons for whose Use they were meant; and he found by Experience the
great Impressions which they made on the Philosopher, as well as on the Divine:
For, to say the Truth, there is no kind of Flattery so irresistible as this, at
second Hand.

The young Gentleman, moreover, soon perceived how extremely grateful all those
Panegyricks on his Instructors were to Mr. Allworthy himself, as they so loudly
resounded the Praise of that singular Plan of Education which he had laid down:
For this worthy Man having observed the imperfect Institution of our public
Schools, and the many Vices which Boys were there liable to learn, had resolved
to educate his Nephew, as well as the other Lad, whom he had in a Manner
adopted, in his own House; where he thought their Morals would escape all that
Danger of being corrupted, to which they would be unavoidably exposed in any
public School or University.

Having therefore determined to commit these Boys to the Tuition of a private
Tutor, Mr. Thwackum was recommended to him for that Office, by a very
particular Friend, of whose Understanding Mr. Allworthy had a great Opinion,
and in whose Integrity he placed much Confidence. This Thwackum was Fellow of a
College, where he almost entirely resided; and had a great Ruputation for
Learning, Religion and Sobriety of Manners. And these were doubtless the
Qualifications by which Mr. Allworthy's Friend had been induced to recommend
him; though indeed this Friend had some Obligations to Thwackum's Family, who
were the most considerable Persons in a Borough which that Gentleman
represented in Parliament.

Thwackum, at his first Arrival, was extremely agreeable to Allworthy; and
indeed he perfectly answered the Character which had been given of him. Upon
longer Acquaintance, however, and more intimate Conversation, this worthy Man
saw Infirmities in the Tutor, which he could have wished him to have been
without; though as those seemed greatly overballanced by his good Qualities, they
did not incline Mr. Allworthy to part with him; nor would they indeed have
justified such a Proceeding: For the Reader is greatly mistaken, if he
conceives that Thwackum appeared to Mr. Allworthy in the same Light as he does
to him in this History; and he is as much deceived, if he imagines, that the
most intimate Acquaintenance which he himself could have had with that Divine,
would have informed him of those Things which we, from our Inspiration, are
enabled to open and discover. Of Readers who from such Conceits as these,
condemn the Wisdom or Penetration of Mr. Allworthy, I shall not scruple to say,
that they make a very bad and ungrateful Use of that Knowledge which we have
communicated to them.

These apparent Errors in the Doctrine of Thwackum, served greatly to palliate
the contrary Errors in that of Square, which our good Man no less saw and
condemned. He thought indeed that the different Exuberancies of these
Gentlemen, would correct their different Imperfections; and that from both,
especially with his Assistance, the two Lads would derive sufficient Precepts
of true Religion and Virtue. If the Event happened contrary to his
Expectations, this possibly proceeded from some Fault in the Plan itself; which
the Reader has my Leave to discover, if he can. For we do not pretend to
introduce any infallible Characters into this History; where we hope nothing
will be found which never has yet been seen in human Nature.

To return therefore; the Reader will not, I think, wonder that the different
Behavior of the two Lads above commemorated, produced the different Effects,
of which he has already seen some Instance; and besides this, there was
another Reason for the Conduct of the Philosopher and the Pedagogue; but this
being Matter of great Importance, we shall reveal it in the next Chapter.

CHAP. VI.
Containing a better Reason still for the beforementioned Opinions.

IT is to be known then, that those two learned Personages, who have lately
made a considerable Figure on the Theater of this History, had from their ^^rst
Arrival at Mr. Allworthy's House, taken so great ^n Affection, the one to his
Virtue, the other to his Religion, that they had meditated the closest Alliance
with him.

For this Purpose they had cast their Eyes on that ^air Widow, whom, though we
have not for some Time made any mention of her, the Reader, we trust, has not
forgot. Mrs. Blifil was indeed the Object to which they both aspired.

It may seem remarkable that of four Persons whom we have commemorated at Mr.
Allworthy's House; three of them should fix their Inclinations on a Lady who
was never greatly celebrated for her Beauty, and who was, moreover, now a
little descended into the Vale of Years; but in reality, Bosom Friends, and
intimate Acquaintance, have a kind of natural Propensity to particular Females
at the House of a Friend; viz. to his Grandmother, Mother, Sister, Daughter,
Aunt, Neice and Cousin, when they are rich, and to his Wife, Sister, Daughter,
Neice, Cousin, Mistress or Servant Maid, if they should be handsome.

We would not, however, have our Reader imagine, that Persons of such
Characters as were supported by Thwackum and Square, would undertake a Matter
of this Kind, which has been a little censured by some rigid Moralists, before
they had thoroughly examined it, and considered whether it was (as Shakespeare
phrases it) 'Stuff, of the Conscience' or no. Thwackum was encouraged to the
Undertaking, by reflecting, that to court your Neighbor's Sister is no where
forbidden, and he knew it was a Rule in the Construction of all Laws, that
"Expressum facit cessare Tacitum," the Sense of which is, 'When a Lawgiver
sets down plainly his whole Meaning, we are prevented from making him mean what
we please ourselves.' As some Instances of Women, therefore, are mentioned in
the divine Law, which forbids us to covet our Neighbors Goods, and that of a
Sister omitted, he concluded it to be lawful. And as to Square, who was in his
Person what is called a jolly Fellow, or a Widow's Man, he easily reconciled
his Choice to the eternal Fitness of Things.

Now, as both these Gentlemen were industrious in taking every Opportunity of
recommending themselves to the Widow, they apprehended one certain Method was,
by giving her Son the constant Preference to the other Lad; and as they
conceived the Kindness and Affection which Mr. Allworthy showed the latter,
must be highly disagreeable to her, they doubted not but the laying hold on all
Occasions to degrade and villify him, would be highly pleasing to her; who, as
she hated the Boy, must love all those who did him any hurt. In this Thwackum
had the Advantage; for while Square could only scarify the poor Lad's
Reputation, he could flea his Skin; and indeed he considered every Lash he gave
him as a Compliment paid to his Mistress; so that he could with the utmost
Propriety repeat this old flogging Line, "Castigo te non quod odio habeam, sed
quod AMEM; I chastise thee not out of Hatred, but out of Love." And this indeed
he often had in his Mouth, or rather, according to the old Phrase, never more
properly applied, at his Fingers Ends.

For this Reason principally, the two Gentlemen concurred, as we have seen
above, in their Opinion concerning the two Lads; this being indeed almost the
only Instance of their concurring on any Point: For besides the Difference of
their Principles, they had both long ago strongly suspected each others Design,
and hated one another with no little Degree of Inveteracy.

This mutual Animosity was a good deal increased by their alternate Successes:
For Mrs. Blifil knew what they would be at long before they imagined it; or
indeed intended she should: For they proceeded with great Caution lest she
should be offended, and acquaint Mr. Allworthy; but they had no Reason for any
such Fear. She was well enough pleased with a Passion of which she intended
none should have any Fruits but herself. And the only Fruits she designed for
herself were Flattery and Courtship; for which Purpose, she soothed them by
Turns, and a long Time equally. She was indeed rather inclined to favor the
Parson's Principles; but Square's Person was more agreeable to her Eye; for he
was a comely Man; whereas the Pedagogue did in Countenance very nearly resemble
that Gentleman, who in the Harlot's Progress is seen correcting the Ladies in
Bridewel.

Whether Mrs. Blifil had been surfeited with the Sweets of Marriage, or
disgusted by its Bitters, or from what other Cause it proceeded, I will not
determine; but she could never be brought to listen to any second Proposals.
However, she at last conversed with Square, with such a Degree of Intimacy,
that malicious Tongues began to whisper Things of her, to which, as well for
the Sake of the Lady, as that they were highly disagreeable to the Rule of
Right, and the Fitness of Things, we will give no Credit; and therefore shall
not blot our Paper with them. The Pedagogue, it is certain, whipped on without
getting a Step nearer to his Journey's End.

Indeed he had committed a great Error, and that Square discovered much sooner
than himself. Mrs. Blifl (as perhaps the Readers may have formerly guessed) was
not over and above pleased with the Behavior of her Husband; nay to be honest,
she absolutely hated him, till his Death at last a little reconciled him to her
Affections. It will not be therefore greatly wondered at, if she had not the
most violent Regard to the Offspring she had by him. And, in fact, he had so
little of this Regard, that in his Infancy she seldom saw her Son, or took any
Notice of him; and hence she acquiesced, after a little Reluctance, in all the
Favors which Mr. Allworthy showered on the Foundling; whom the good Man called
his own Boy, and in all Things put on an entire Equality with Master Blifil.
This Acquiescence in Mrs. Blifil was considered by the Neighbors, and by the
Family, as a Mark of her Condescension to her Brother's Humor, and she was
imagined by all others, as well as Thwackum and Square, to hate the Foundling
in her Heart; nay, the more Civility she showed him, the more they conceived
she detested him, and the surer Schemes she was laying for his Ruin: For as
they thought it her Interest to hate him, it was very difficul for her to
persuade them she did not.

Thwackum was the more confirmed in his Opinion, as she had more than once
caused him to whip Tom Jones, when Mr. Allworthy, who was an Enemy to this
Exercise, was abroad; whereas she had never given any such Orders concerning
young Blifil. And this had likewise imposed upon Square. In reality, though she
certainly hated her own Son; of which, however monstrous it appears, I am
assured she is not a singular Instance, she appeared, notwithstanding all her
outward Compliance, to be in her Heart sufficiently displeased with all the
Favor shown by Mr. Allworthy to the Foundling. She frequently complained of
this behind her Brother's Back, and very sharply censured him for it, both to
Thwackum and Square; nay, she would throw it in the Teeth of Allworthy himself,
when a little Quarrel or Miff, as it is vulgarly called, arose between them.

However, when Tom grew up, and gave Tokens of that Gallantry of Temper which
greatly recommends Men to Women, this Disinclination which she had discovered
to him when a Child, by Degrees abated, and at last she so evidently
demonstrated her Affection to him to be much stronger than what she bore her
own Son, that it was impossible to mistake her any longer. She was so desirous
of often seeing him, and discovered such Satisfaction and Delight in his
Company, that before he was eighteen Years old, he was become a Rival to both
Square and Thwackum; and what is worse, the whole Country began to talk as
loudly of her Inclination to Tom, as they had before done of that which she had
shown to Square; on which Account the Philosopher conceived the most ^mplacable
Hatred for our poor Hero.

CHAP. VII.
In which the Author himself makes his Appearance on the Stage.

THOUGH Mr. Allworthy was not of himself hasty to see Things in a Disadvantageous
Light, and was a Stranger to the public Voice, which seldom reaches to a
Brother or a Husband, though it rings in the Ears of all the Neighborhood; yet
was this Affection of Mrs. Blifil to Tom, and the Preference which she too
visibly gave him to her own Son, of the utmost Disadvantage to that Youth.

For such was the Compassion which inhabited Mr. Allworthy's Mind, that nothing
but the Steel of Justice could ever subdue it. To be unfortunate in any Respect
was sufficient, if there was no Demerit to counterpoise it, to turn the Scale
of that good Man's Pity, and to engage his Friendship, and his Benefaction.

When therefore he plainly saw Master Blifil was absolutely detested (for that
he was) by his own Mother, he began, on that Account only, to look with an Eye
of Compassion upon him; and what the Effects of Compassion are in good and
benevolent Minds, I need not here explain to most of my Readers.

Henceforward, he saw every Appearance of Virtue in the Youth through the
magnifying End, and viewed all his Faults with the Glass inverted, so that they
became scarce perceptible. And this perhaps the amiable Temper of Pity may make
commendable; but the next Step the Weakness of human Nature alone must excuse:
For he no sooner perceived that Preference which Mrs. Blifil gave to Tom, than
that poor Youth, (however innocent) began to sink in his Affections as he rose
in hers. This, it is true, would of itself alone never have been able to
eradicate Jones from his Bosom; but it was greatly injurious to him, and
prepared Mr. Allworthy's Mind, for those Impressions, which afterward produced
the mighty Event, that will be contained hereafter in this History; and to
which, it must be confessed, the unfortunate Lad, by his own Wantonness,
Wildness, and want of Caution, too much contributed.

In recording some Instances of these, we shall, if rightly understood, afford
a very useful Lesson to those well-disposed Youths, who shall hereafter be our
Readers: For they may here find that Goodness of Heart, and Openness of Temper,
though these may give them great Comfort within, and administer to an honest
Pride in their own Minds, will by no Means, alas! do their Business in the
World. Prudence and Circumspection are necessary even to the best of Men. They
are indeed as it were a Guard to Virtue, without which she can never be safe.
It is not enough tha^ your Designs, nay that your Actions are intrinsically
good, you must take Care they shall appear so. If you^ Inside be never so
beautiful, you must preserve a fai^ Outside also. This must be constantly
looked to, o^ Malice and Envy will take Care to blacken it so, tha^ the
Sagacity and Goodness of an Allworthy will not be able to see through it, and
to discern the Beauties within. Let this, my younger Readers, be you^ constant
Maxim, That no Man can be good enough to enable him to neglect the Rules of
Prudence; not will Virtue herself look beautiful, unless she be be+ decked with
the outward Ornaments of Decency and Decorum. And this Precept, my worthy
Disciples, if you read with due Attention, you will, I hope, find sufficiently
enforced by Examples in the following Pages.

I ask Pardon for this short Appearance, by way of Chorus on the Stage. It is
in Reality for my own Sake, that while I am discovering the Rocks on which
Innocence and Goodness often split, I may not be misunderstood to recommend the
very Means to my worthy Readers, by which I intend to show them they will be
undone. And this as I could not prevail on any of my Actors to speak, I was
obliged to declare my self.

CHAP. VIII.
A childish Incident, in which, however, is seen a good natured Disposition in
Tom Jones.

THE Reader may remember, that Mr. Allworthy gave Tom Jones a little Horse, as
a kind of smart Money for the Punishment, which he imagined he had suffered
innocently.

This Horse Tom kept above half a Year, and then rode him to a neighboring
Fair, and sold him.

At his Return, being questioned by Thwackum, what he had done with the Money
for which the Horse was sold, he frankly declared he would not tell him.

Oho! says Thwackum, you will not! then I will have it out of your Br -- h;
that being the Place to which he always applied for Information, on every
doubtful Occasion.

Tom was now mounted on the Back of a Footman, and every Thing prepared for
Execution, when Mr. Allworthy entering the Room, gave the Criminal a Reprieve,
and took him with him into another Apartment; where Mr. Allworthy being only
present with Tom, he put the same Question to him which Thwackum had before
asked him.

Tom answered, He could in Duty refuse him nothing; but as for that tyrannical
Rascal, he would never make him any other Answer than with a Cudgel, with which
he hoped soon to be able to pay him for all his Barbarities.

Mr. Allworthy very severely reprimanded the Lad, for his indecent and
disrespectful Expressions concerning his Master; but much more for his avowing
an Intention of Revenge. He threatened him with the entire Loss of his Favor,
if he ever heard such another Word from his Mouth; for he said, he would never
support or befriend a Reprobate. By these and the like Declarations, he
extorted some Compunction from Tom, in which that Youth was not over sincere:
For he really meditated some Return for all the smarting Favors he had
received at the Hands of the Pedagogue. He was, however, brought by Mr.
Allworthy to express a Concern for his Resentment against Thwackum; and then
the good Man, after some wholesome Admonition, permitted him to proceed, which
he did, as follows.

'Indeed, my dear Sir, I love and honor you more than all the World; I know
the great Obligations I have to you, and should detest myself, if I thought my
Heart was capable of Ingratitude. Could the little Horse you gave me speak, I
am sure he could tell you how fond I was of your Present: For I had more
Pleasure in feeding him, than in riding him. Indeed, Sir, it went to my Heart
to part with him; nor would I have sold him upon any other Account in the World
than what I did. You yourself, Sir, I am convinced in my Case, would have done
the same: For none ever so sensibly felt the Misfortunes of others. What would
you feel, dear Sir, if you thought yourself the Occasion of them? -- Indeed,
Sir, there was never any Misery like theirs. -- Like whose, Child," says
Allworthy, what do you mean? Oh, Sir,' answered Tom, your poor Game-keeper,
with all his large Family, ever since your discarding him, have been perishing
with all the Miseries of Cold and Hunger. I could not bear to see these poor
Wretches naked and starving, and at the same Time know myself to have been the
Occasion of all their Sufferings. -- I could not bear it, Sir, upon my Soul, I
could not." (here the Tears run down his Cheeks, and he thus proceeded) 'It was
to save them from absolute Destruction, I parted with your dear Present,
notwithstanding all the Value I had for it. -- I sold the Horse for them, and
they have every Farthing of the Money.'

Mr. Allworthy now stood silent for some Moments, and before he spoke, the
Tears started from his Eyes. He at length dismissed Tom with a gentle Rebuke,
advising him for the future to apply to him in Cases of Distress, rather than
to use extraordinary Means of relieving them himself.

This Affair was afterward the Subject of much Debate between Thwackum and
Square. Thwackum held, that this was flying in Mr. Allworthy's Face, who had
intended to punish the Fellow for his Disobedience. He said, in some Instances,
what the World called Charity appeared to him to be opposing the Will of the
Almighty, which had marked some particular Persons for Destruction; and that
this was in like manner acting in Opposition to Mr. Allworthy; concluding, as
usual, with a hearty Recommendation of Birch.

Square argued strongly, on the other Side, in Opposition perhaps to Thwackum,
or in Compliance with Mr. Allworthy, who seemed very much to approve what Jones
had done. As to what he urged on this Occasion, as I am convinced most of my
Readers will be much abler Advocates for poor Jones, it would be impertinent to
relate it. Indeed it was not difficult to reconcile to the Rule of Right, an
Action which it would have been impossible to deduce from the Rule of Wrong.

CHAP. IX.
Containing an Incident of a more heinous Kind, with the Comments of Thwackum
and Square.

IT has been observed by some Man of much greater Reputation for Wisdom than
myself, that Misfortunes seldom come single. An Instance of this may, I
believe, be seen in those Gentlemen who have the Misfortune to have any of
their Rogueries detected: For here Discovery seldom stops till the whole is
come out. Thus it happened to poor Tom; who was no sooner pardoned for selling
the Horse, than he was discovered to have some time before sold a fine Bible
which Mr. Allworthy gave him, the Money arising from which Sale he had disposed
in the same Manner. This Bible Master Blifil had purchased, though he had
already such another of his own, partly out of respect for the Book, and partly
out of Friendship to Tom, being unwilling that the Bible should be sold out of
the Family at half Price. He therefore deposited the said half Price himself;
for he was a very prudent Lad, and so careful of his Money, that he had laid up
almost every Penny which he had received from Mr. Allworthy.

Some People have been noted to be able to read in no Book but their own. On
the contrary, from the Time when Master Blifil was first possessed of this
Bible, he never used any other. Nay, he was seen reading in it much oftener than
he had before been in his own. Now, as he frequently asked Thwackum to explain
difficult Passages to him, that Gentleman unfortunately took Notice of Tom's
Name, which was written in many Parts of the Book. This brought on an Enquiry,
which obliged Master Blifil to discover the whole Matter.

Thwackum was resolved, a Crime of this Kind, which he called Sacrilege, should
not go unpunished. He therefore proceeded immediately to Castigation; and not
contented with that, he acquainted Mr. Allworthy, at their next Meeting, with
this monstrous Crime, as it appeared to him; inveighing against Tom in the most
bitter Terms, and likening him to the Buyers and Sellers who were driven out of
the Temple.

Square saw this Matter in a very different Light. He said, He could not
perceive any higher Crime in selling one Book, than in selling another. That to
sell Bibles was strictly lawful by all Laws both divine and human, and
consequently there was no Unfitness in it. He told Thwackum that his great
Concern on this Occasion brought to his Mind the Story of a very devout Woman,
who out of pure Regard to Religion, stole Tillotson's Sermons from a Lady of
her Acquaintance.

This Story caused a vast Quantity of Blood to rush into the Parson's Face,
which of itself was none of the palest; and he was going to reply with great
Warmth and Anger, had not Mrs. Blifil, who was present at this Debate,
interposed. That Lady declared herself absolutely of Mr. Square's Side. She
argued, indeed, very learnedly in Support of his Opinion; and concluded with
saying, If Tom had been guilty of any Fault, she must confess her own Son
appeared to be equally culpable; for that she could see no Difference between
the Buyer and the Seller; both of whom were alike to be driven out of the
Temple.

Mrs. Blifil having declared her Opinion, put an End to the Debate. Square's
Triumph would almost have stopped his Words, had he needed them; and Thwackum,
besides that, for Reasons beforementioned, he durst not venture at disobliging
the Lady, was almost choked with Indignation. As to Mr. Allworthy, he said,
Since the Boy had been already punished, he would not deliver his Sentiments on
the Occasion; and whether he was, or was not angry with the Lad, I must leave
to the Reader's own Conjecture.

Soon after this, an Action was brought against the Game-keeper by 'Squire
Western (the Gentleman in whose Manor the Partridge was killed) for
Depredations of the like Kind. This was a most unfortunate Circumstance for the
Fellow, as it not only of itself threatened his Ruin, but actually prevented
Mr. Allworthy from restoring him to his Favor: For as that Gentleman was
walking out one Evening with Master Blifil and young Jones, the latter slily
drew him to the Habitation of Black George; where the Family of that poor
Wretch, namely, his Wife and Children, were found in all the Misery with which
Cold, Hunger, and Nakedness, can affect human Creatures: For as to the Money
they had received from Jones, former Debts had consumed almost the whole.

Such a Scene as this could not fail of affecting the Heart of Mr. Allworthy.
He immediately gave the Mother a couple of Guineas, with which he bid her
cloth her Children. The poor Woman burst into Tears at this Goodness, and
while she was thanking him, could not refrain from expressing her Gratitude to
Tom; who had, she said, long preserved both her and hers from starving. We have
not, says she, had a Morsel to eat, nor have these poor Children had a Rag to
put on, but what his Goodness has bestowed on us: For indeed, besides the
Horse and the Bible, Tom had sacrificed a Nightgown and other Things to the
Use of this distressed Family.

On their Return home, Tom made use of all his Eloquence to display the
Wretchedness of these People, and the Penitence of Black George himself, and in
this he succeeded so well, that Mr. Allworthy said He thought the Man had
suffered enough for what was past; that he would forgive him, and think of some
Means of providing for him and his Family.

Jones was so delighted with this News, that though it was dark when they
returned home, he could not help going back a Mile in a Shower of Rain to
acquaint the poor Woman with the glad Tidings; but, like other hasty Divulgers
of News, he only brought on himself the Trouble of contradicting it: For the
Ill-fortune of Black George made use of the very Opportunity of his Friend's
Absence to overturn all again.

CHAP. X.
In which Master Blifil and Jones appear in different Lights.

MASTER Blifil fell very short of his Companion in the amiable Quality of
Mercy; but he as greatly exceeded him in one of a much higher Kind, namely, in
Justice: In which he followed both the Precepts and example of Thwackum and
Square; for though they would both make frequent Use of the Word Mercy, yet it
was plain, that in reality Square held it to be inconsistent with the Rule of
Right; and Thwackum was for doing Justice, and leaving Mercy to Heaven. The two
Gentlemen did indeed somewhat differ in Opinion concerning the Objects of this
sublime Virtue; by which Thwackum would probably have destroyed one half of
Mankind, and Square the other half.

Master Blifil then, though he had kept Silence in the Presence of Jones, yet
when he had better considered the Matter, he could by no Means endure the
Thought of suffering his Uncle to confer Favors on the Undeserving. He
therefore resolved immediately to acquaint him with the Fact which we have
above slightly hinted to the Readers. The Truth of which was as follows:

The Game-keeper, about a Year after he was dismissed from Mr. Allworthy's
Service, and before Tom's selling the Horse, being in Want of Bread, either to
fill his own Mouth, or those of his Family, as he passed through a Field
belonging to Mr. Western, espied a Hare sitting in her Form. This Hare he had
basely and barbarously knocked on the Head, against the Laws of the Land, and
no less against the Laws of Sportsmen.

The Higler to whom the Hare was sold, being unfortunately taken many Months
after with a Quantity of Game upon him, was obliged to make his Peace with the
'Squire by becoming Evidence against some Poacher. And now Black George was
pitched upon by him as being a Person already obnoxious to Mr. Western, and one
of no good Fame in the Country. He was, besides, the best Sacrifice the Higler
could make, as he had supplied him with no Game since; and by this Means the
Witness had an Opportunity of screening his better Customers: For the 'Squire,
being charmed with the Power of Punishing Black George, whom a single
Transgression was sufficient to ruin, made no further Enquiry.

Had this Fact been truly laid before Mr. Allworthy, it might probably have
done the Game-keeper very little Mischief. But there is no Zeal blinder than
that which is inspired with the Love of Justice against Offenders. Master
Blifil had forgot the Distance of the Time. He varied likewise in the Manner of
the Fact; and, by the hasty Addition of the single Letter S, he considerably
altered the Story; for he said that George had wired Hares. These Alterations
might probably have been set right, had not Master Blifil unluckily insisted on
a Promise of Secrecy from Mr. Allworthy, before he revealed the Matter to him;
but by that Means, the poor Game-keeper was condemned, without having any
Opportunity to defend himself: For as the Fact of killing the Hare, and of the
Action brought, were certainly true, Mr. Allworthy had no Doubt concerning the
rest.

Short-lived then was the Joy of these poor People; for Mr. Allworthy the next
Morning declared he had fresh Reason, without assigning it, for his Anger, and
strictly forbad Tom to mention George any more; though as for his Family, he
said, he would endeavor to keep them from starving; but as to the Fellow
himself, he would leave him to the Laws, which nothing could keep him from
breaking.

Tom could by no Means divine what had incensed Mr. Allworthy: For of Master
Blifil he had not the least Suspicion. However, as his Friendship was to be
tired out by no Disappointments, he now determined to try another Method of
preserving the poor Game-keeper from Ruin.

Jones was lately grown very intimate with Mr. Western. He had so greatly
recommended himself to that Gentleman, by leaping over five-barred Gates, and
by other Acts of Sportmanship, that the Squire had declared Tom would certainly
make a great Man, if he had but sufficient Encouragement. He often wished he
had himself a Son with such Parts; and one Day very solemnly asserted at a
drinking Bout, that Tom should hunt a Pack of Hounds for a thousand Pound of
his Money with any Huntsman in the whole County.

By such kind of Talents he had so ingratiated himself with the Squire, that he
was a most welcome Guest at his Table, and a favorite Companion in his Sport:
Every Thing which the Squire held most dear, to wit, his Guns, Dogs, and
Horses, were now as much at the Command of Jones, as if they had been his own.
He resolved therefore to make use of this Favor on Behalf of his Friend Black
George, whom he hoped to introduce into Mr. Western's Family in the same
Capacity in which he had before served Mr. Allworthy.

The Reader, if he considers that this Fellow was already obnoxious to Mr.
Western, and if he considers farther the weighty Business by which that
Gentleman's Displeasure had been incurred, will perhaps condemn this as a
foolish and desperate Undertaking; but if he should not totally condemn young
Jones on that Account, he will greatly applaud him for strengthening himself
with all imaginable Interest on so arduous an Occasion.

For this Purpose then Tom applied to Mr. Western's Daughter, a young Lady of
about seventeen Years of Age, whom her Father, next after those necessary
Implements of Sport just before mentioned, loved and esteemed above all the
World. Now as she had some Influence on the Squire, so Tom had some Influence
on her. But this being the intended Heroine of this Work, a Lady with whom we
are ourselves greatly in Love, and with whom many of our Readers will probably
be in Love too before we part, it is by no Means proper she should make her
Appearance at the End of a Book.

THE HISTORY OF A FOUNDLING.
BOOK IV.
Containing the Time of a Year.

CHAP. I.
Containing four Pages of Paper.

AS Truth distinguishes our Writings from those idle Romances which are filled
with Monsters, the Productions, not of nature, but of distempered Brains; and
which have been therefore recommended by an eminent Critic to the sole Use of
the Pastry-Cook: So, on the other hand, we would avoid any Resemblance to that
Kind of History which a celebrated Poet seems to think is no less calculated
for the Emolument of the Brewer, as the reading of it should be always attended
with a Tankard of good Ale.

While -- History with her Comrade Ale,
Sooths the sad Series of her serious Tale.
For as this is the Liquor of modern Historians, nay, perhaps their Muse, if we
may believe the Opinion of Butler, who attributes inspiration to Ale, it ought
likewise to be the Potation of their Readers; since every Book ought to be read
with the same Spirit, and in the same manner, as it is writ. Thus the famous
Author of Hurlothrumbo told a learned Bishop, that the Reason his Lordship
could not taste the Excellence of his Piece, was that he did not read it with a
Fiddle in his Hand; which Instrument he himself always had in his own, when he
composed it.

That our Work, therefore, might be in no Danger of being likened to the
Labors of these Historians, we have taken every Occasion of interspersing
through the whole sundry Similies, Descriptions, and other kind of poetical
Embellishments. These are indeed, designed to supply the Place of the said Ale,
and to refresh the Mind, whenever those Slumbers which in a long Work are apt
to invade the Reader as well the Writer, shall begin to creep upon him. Without
Interruptions of this Kind, the best Narrative of plain Matter of Fact must
overpower every Reader; for nothing but the everlasting Watchfulness, which
Homer has ascribed to Jove himself, can be Proof against a News Paper of many
Volumes.

We shall leave to the Reader to determine with what Judgment we have chosen
the several Occasions for inserting these ornamental Parts of our Work. Surely
it will be allowed that none could be more proper than the present; where we
are about to introduce a considerable Character on the Scene; no less, indeed,
than the Heroine of this Heroic, Historical, Prosaic Poem. Here, therefore, we
have thought proper to prepare the Mind of the Reader for her Reception, by
filling it with every pleasing Image, which we can draw from the Face of
Nature. And for this Method we plead many Precedents. First, this is an Art
well known to, and much practiced by, our Tragic Poets; who seldom fail to
prepare their Audience for the Reception of their principal Characters.

Thus the Hero is always introduced with a flourish of Drums and Trumpets, in
order to rouse a martial Spirit in the Audience, and to accommodate their Ears
to Bombast and Fustian, which Mr. Lock's blind Man would not have grossly erred
in likening to the Sound of a Trumpet. Again, when Lovers are coming forth,
soft Music often conducts them on the Stage, either to sooth the Audience with
all the Softness of the tender Passion, or to lull or prepare them for that
gentle Slumber in which they will most probably be composed by the ensuing
Scene.

And not only the Poets, but the Masters of these Poets, the Managers of
Play Houses, seem to be in this Secret; for, besides the aforesaid Kettle
Drums, etc. which denote the Hero's Approach, he is generaly ushered on the
Stage by a large Troop of half a dozen Scene-shifters; and how necessary these
are imagined to his Appearance, may be concluded from the following Theatrical
Story.

King Pyrrhus was at Dinner at an Alehouse bordering on the Theater, when he
was summoned to go on the Stage. The Hero, being unwilling to quit his
Shoulder of Mutton, and as unwilling to draw on himself the Indignation of Mr.
Wilks, (his Brother Manager) for making the Audience wait, had bribed these his
Harbingers to be out of the Way. While Mr. Wilks, therefore, was thundering
out, 'Where are the Carpenters to walk on before King Pyrrhus,' that Monarch
very quietly eat his Mutton, and the Audience, however impatient, were obliged
to entertain themselves with Music in his Absence.

To be plain, I much question whether the Politician, who has generally a good
Nose, has not scented out somewhat of the Utility of this Practice. I am
convinced that awful Magistrate my Lord Mayor contracts a good deal of that
Reverence which attends him through the Year, by the several Pageants who
precede his Pomp. Nay, I must confess, that even I myself, who am not
remarkably liable to be captivated with Show, have yielded not a little to the
Impressions of much preceding State. When I have seen a Man strutting in a
Procession, after others whose Business has been only to walk before him, I
have conceived a higher Notion of his Dignity, than I have felt on seeing him
in a common Situation. But there is one Instance which comes exactly up to my
Purpose. This is the Custom of sending on a Basket-woman, who is to precede the
Pomp at a Coronation, and to strew the Stage with Flowers, before the great
Personages begin their Procession. The Ancients would certainly have invoked
the Goddess Flora for this Purpose, and it would have been no Difficulty for
their Priests or Politicians to have persuaded the People of the real Presence
of the Deity, though a plain Mortal had personated her, and performed her
Office. But we have no such Design of imposing on our Reader, and therefore
those who object to the Heathen Theology, may, if they please, change our
Goddess into the abovementioned Basket-woman. Our Intention, in short, is to
introduce our Heroine with the utmost Solemnity in our Power, with an Elevation
of Style, and all other Circumstances proper to raise the Veneration of our
Reader. Indeed we would, for certain Causes, advise those of our Male Readers
who have any Hearts, to read no farther, were we not well assured, that how
amiable soever the Picture of our Heroine will appear, as it is really a Copy
from Nature, many of our fair Country-women will be found worthy to satisfy any
Passion, and to answer any Idea of Female Perfection, which our Pencil will be
able to raise.

And now, without any further Preface, we proceed to our next Chapter.

CHAP. II.
A short Hint of what we can do in the Sublime, and a Description of Miss
Sophia Western.

HUshed be every ruder Breath. May the Heathen Ruler of the Winds confine in
Iron Chains the boisterous Limbs of noisy Boreas, and the sharp-pointed Nose of
bitter-biting Eurus. Do thou, sweet Zephyrus, rising from thy fragrant Bed,
mount the Western Sky, and lead on those delicious Gales, the Charms of which
call forth the lovely Flora from her Chamber, perfumed with pearly Dews, when
on the first of June, her Birthday, the blooming Maid in loose Attire, gently
trips it over the verdant Mead, where every Flower rises to do her Homage, till
the whole Field becomes enamelled, and Colors contend with Sweets which shall
ravish her most.

So charming may show now appear; and you the feathered Choristers of Nature,
whose sweetest Notes not even Handel can excel, tune your melodious Throats, to
celebrate her Appearance. From Love proceeds your Music, and to Love it
returns. Awaken therefore that gentle Passion in every Swain: for lo! adorned
with all the Charms in which Nature can array her; bedecked with Beauty, Youth,
Sprightliness, Innocence, Modesty, and Tenderness, breathing Sweetness from her
rosy Lips, and darting Brightness from her sparkling Eyes, the lovely Sophia
comes.

Reader, perhaps thou have seen the Statue of the Venus de Medicis. Perhaps
too, thou have seen the Gallery of Beauties at Hampton Court. Thou may
remember each bright Churchill of the Gallaxy, and all the Toasts of the
Kit-Cat. Or if their Reign was before thy Times, at least thou have seen their
Daughters, the no less dazzling Beauties of the present Age; whose Names,
should we here insert, we apprehended they would fill the whole Volume.

Now if thou have seen all these, be not afraid of the rude Answer which Lord
Rochester once gave to a Man, who had seen many Things. No. If thou have seen
all these without knowing what Beauty is, thou have no Eyes; if without feeling
its Power, thou have no Heart.

Yet is it possible, my Friend, that thou may have seen all these without
being able to form an exact Idea of Sophia: for she did not exactly resemble
any of them. She was most like the Picture of Lady Renelagh; and I have heard
more still to the famous Duchess of Mazarine: but most of all, she resembled
one whose Image never can depart from my Breast, and whom, if thou do
remember, thou have then, my Friend, an adequate Idea of Sophia.

But lest this should not have been thy Fortune, we will endeavor with our
utmost Skill to describe this Paragon, though we are sensible that our highest
Abilities are very inadequate to the Task.

Sophia then, the only Daughter of Mr. Western, was a middle-sized Woman; but
rather inclining to tall. Her Shape was not only exact, but extremely delicate;
and the nice Proportion of her Arms promised the truest Symmetry in her Limbs.
Her Hair, which was black, was so luxuriant, that it reached her Middle, before
she cut it, to comply with the modern Fashion; and it was now curled so
gracefully in her Neck, that few would believe it to be her own. If Envy could
find any Part of her Face which demanded less Commendation than the rest, it
might possibly think her Forehead might have been higher without Prejudice to
her. Her Eyebrows were full, even, and arched beyond the Power of Art to
imitate. Her black Eyes had a Luster in them, which all her Softness could not
extinguish. Her Nose was exactly regular, and her Mouth, in which were two Rows
of Ivory, exactly answered Sir John Suckling's Description in those Lines.

Her Lips were red, and one was thin,
Compared to that was next her Chin.
Some Be had stung it newly.
Her Cheeks, were of the oval Kind; and in her right she had a Dimple which the
least Smile discovered. Her Chin had certainly its Share in forming the Beauty
of her Face; but it was difficult to say it was either large or small, though
perhaps it was rather of the former kind. Her Complexion had rather more of the
Lilly than of the Rose; but when Exercise, or Modesty, increased her natural
Color, no Vermilion could equal it. Then one might indeed cry out with the
celebrated Dr. Done.

-- Her pure and eloquent Blood
Spoke in her Cheeks, and so distinctly wrought,
That one might almost say her Body thought.
Her Neck was long and finely turned; and here, if I was not afraid of
offending her Delicacy, I might justly say, the highest Beauties of the famous
Venus de Medicis were outdone. Here was Whiteness which no Lillies, Ivory, nor
Alabaster could match. The finest Cambric might indeed be supposed from Envy to
cover that Bosom, which was much whiter than itself, -- It was indeed,

Nitor splendens Pario marmore purius. "A Gloss shining beyond the purest
Brightness of Parian Marble."

Such was the Outside of Sophia; nor was this beautiful Frame disgraced by an
Inhabitant unworthy of it. Her Mind was every way equal to her Person; nay, the
latter borrowed some Charms from the former: For when she smiled, the Sweetness
of her Temper diffused that Glory over her Countenance, which no Regularity of
Features can give. But as there are no Perfections of the Mind which do not
discover themselves, in that perfect Intimacy, to which we intend to introduce
our Reader, with this charming young Creature; so it is needless to mention
them here: Nay, it is a Kind of tacit Affront to our Reader's Understanding,
and may also rob him of that Pleasure which he will receive in forming his own
Judgment of her Character.

It may however, be proper to say, that whatever mental Accomplishments she had
derived from Nature, they were somewhat improved and cultivated by Art: for she
had been educated under the Care of an Aunt, who was a Lady of great
Discretion, and was thoroughly acquainted with the World, having lived in her
Youth about the Court, whence she had retired some Years since into the
Country. By her Conversation and Instructions, Sophia was perfectly wellbred,
though perhaps she wanted a little of that Ease in her Behavior, which is to
be acquired only by Habit, and living within what is called the polite Circle.
But this, to say the Truth, is often too dearly purchased; and though it has
Charms so inexpressible, that the French, perhaps, among other Qualities, mean
to express this, when they declare they know not what it is, yet its Absence is
well compensated by Innocence; nor can good Sense, and a natural Gentility ever
stand in need of it.

CHAP. III.
Wherein the History goes back to commemorate a trifling Incident that happened
some Years since; but which, trifling as it was, had some future Consequences.

THE amiable Sophia was now in her eighteenth Year, when she is introduced into
this History. Her Father, as has been said, was fonder of her than of any
other human Creature. To her, therefore, Tom Jones applied, in order to engage
her Interest on the Behalf of his Friend the Game-keeper.

But before we proceed to this Business, a short Re^apitulation of some
previous Matters may be necessary.

Though the different Tempers of Mr. Allworthy, and of Mr. Western did not
admit of a very intimate Correspondence, yet they lived upon what is called a
^ecent Footing together; by which Means the young People of both Families had
been acquainted from their Infancy; and as they were all near of the same Age,
had been frequent Play-mates together.

The Gaiety of Tom's Temper suited better with Sophia, than the grave and sober
Disposition of Master Blifil. And the Preference which she gave the former of
these, would often appear so plainly, that a Lad of a more passionate Turn than
Master Blifil was, might have shown some Displeasure at it.

As he did not, however, outwardly express any such Disgust, it would be an ill
Office in us to pay a Visit to the inmost Recesses of his Mind, as some
scandalous People search into the most secret Affairs of their Friends, and
often pry into their Closets and Cupboards, only to discover their Poverty and
Meanness to the World.

However, as Persons who suspect they have given others Cause of Offense, are
apt to conclude they are offended; so Sophia imputed an Action of Master
Blifil, to his Anger, which the superior Sagacity of Thwackum and Square
discerned to have arisen from a much better Principle.

Tom Jones, when very young, had presented Sophia with a little Bird, which he
had taken from the Nest, had nursed up, and taught to sing.

Of this Bird, Sophia, then about thirteen Years old, was so extremely fond,
that her chief Business was to feed and tend it, and her chief Pleasure to play
with it. By these Means little Tommy, for so the Bird was called, was become so
tame, that it would feed out of the Hand of its Mistress, would perch up on her
Finger, and lie contented in her Bosom, where it seemed almost sensible of its
own Happiness; tho she always kept a small String about its Leg, no would ever
trust it with the Liberty of flying away.

One Day, when Mr. Allworthy and his whole Family, dined at Mr. Western's,
Master Blifil, being in the Garden with little Sophia, and observing the
extreme Fondness that she showed for her little Bird, desired her to trust it
for a Moment in his Hands. Sophia presently complied with the young Gentleman's
Request, and after some previous Caution, delivered him her Bird; of which he
was no sooner in Possession, than he slipped the String from its Leg, and tossed
it into the Air.

The foolish Animal no sooner perceived itself at Liberty, than forgetting all
the Favors it had received from Sophia, it flew directly from her, and perched
on a Bough at some Distance.

Sophia, seeing her Bird gone, sereamed out so loud, that Tom Jones, who was at
a little Distance, immediately ran to her Assistance.

He was no sooner informed of what had happened, than he cursed Blifil for a
pitiful, malicious Rascal, and then immediately stripping off his Coat, he
applied himself to climbing the Tree to which the Bird escaped.

Tom had almost recovered his little Namesake, when the Branch on which it was
perched, and that hung over a Canal, broke, and the poor Lad plumped over Head
and Ears into the Water.

Sophia's Concern now changed its Object. And as she apprehended the Boy's Life
was in Danger, she screamed ten times louder than before; and indeed Master
Blifil himself now seconded her with all the Vociferation in his Power.

The company who were sitting in a Room next the Garden, were instantly
alarmed, and came all forth; but just as they reached the Canal, Tom, (for ^he
Water was luckily pretty shallow in that Part) ^rrived safely on shore.

Thwackum fell violently on poor Tom, who stood dropping and shivering before
him, when Mr. Allworthy desired him to have Patience, and turning to ^aster
Blifil, said, Pray, Child, what is the Reason ^f all this Disturbance?

Master Blifil answered, 'Indeed, Uncle, I am very sorry for what I have done;
I have been unhappily the Occasion of it all. I had Miss Sophia's Bird in my
Hand, and thinking the poor Creature languished for Liberty, I own, I could not
forbear giving it what it desired: for I always thought there was something
very cruel in confining any Thing. It seemed to me against the Law of Nature,
by which every Thing has a right to Liberty; nay, it is even unchristian; for
it is not doing what we would be done by: But if I had imagined Miss Sophia
would have been so much concerned at it, I am sure I would never have done it;
nay, if I had known what would have happened to the Bird itself; for when
Master Jones, who climbed up the Tree after it, fell into the Water, the Bird
took a second Flight, and presently a nasty Hawk carried it away. Poor Sophia,
who now first heard of her little Tommy's Fate; for her Concern for Jones had
pre^ented her perceiving it when it happened, shed a Shower of Tears. These Mr.
Allworthy endeavored to assuage, promising her a much finer Bird; but he
declared she would never have another. Her Father chid her for crying so for a
foolish Bird; but could not help telling young Blifil, if he was a Son of his,
his Backside should be well flayed.

Sophia now returned to her Chamber, the two ^oung Gentlemen were sent home,
and the rest of the Company returned to their Bottle; where a Conversation
ensued on the Subject of the Bird, so curious that we think it deserves a
Chapter by itself.

CHAP. IV.
Containing such very deep and grave Matters, the some Readers, perhaps, may
not relish it.

SQUARE had no sooner lighted his Pipe, that addressing himself to Allworthy,
he thus began 'Sir, I cannot help congratulating you on your Nephew; who, at an
Age when few Lads have any Ideas but of sensible Objects, is arrived at a
Capacity of distinguishing Right from Wrong. To confine any thing, seems to me
against the Law of Nature, by which every thing has a Right to Liberty. These
were his Words; and the Impression they have made on me is never to be
eradicated. Ca^ any Man have a higher Notion of the Rule of Right and the
Eternal Fitness of Things. I cannot help promising myself from such a Dawn,
that the Meridian of this Youth will be equal to that of either the elder or
the younger Brutus.'

Here Thwackum hastily interrupted, and spilling some of his Wine, and
swallowing the rest with great Eagerness, answered, 'From another Expression h^
made use of, I hope he will resemble much better Men. The Law of Nature is a
Jargon of Words which means nothing. I know not of any such Law, nor of any
Right which can be derive^ from it. To do as we would be done by, is indeed a
Christian Motive, as the Boy well expressed himself, and I am glad to find my
Instructions have born so good Fruit.'

'If Vanity was a thing fit (says Square) I might indulge some on the same
Occasion; for whence h^ can only have learnt his Notions of Right or Wrong I
think is pretty apparent. If there be no Law o^ Nature, there is no Right nor
Wrong.'

'How! (says the Parson) do you then banish Revelation? Am I talking with a
Deist or an Atheist?' 'Drink about, (says Western) Pox of your Laws, of Nature.
I don't know what you mean either of you, by Right and Wrong. To take away my
Girl's Bird was wrong in my Opinion; and my Neighbor Allworthy may do as he
pleases; but to encourage Boys in such Practices, is to breed them up to the
Gallows.'

Allworthy answered, 'that he was sorry for what his Nephew had done; but could
not consent to punish him, as he acted rather from a generous than unworthy
Motive.' He said, 'if the Boy had stolen the Bird, none would have been more
ready to vote for a severe Chastisement than himself; but it was plain that was
not his Design:' And, indeed, was as apparent to him, that he could have no
other View but what he had himself confessed. (For as to that malicious Purpose
which Sophia suspected, it never once entered into the Head of Mr. Allworthy).
He, at length, concluded with again blaming the Action as inconsiderate, and
which, he said, was only pardonable in a Child.

Square had delivered his Opinion so openly, that ^f he was now silent, he must
submit to have his Judgment censured. He said, therefore, with some Warmth,
'that Mr. Allworthy had too much respect to the dirty Consideration of
Property. That in passing our Judgments on great and mighty Actions, all
private Regards should be laid aside; for by adhering to those narrow Rules,
the younger Brutus had been condemned of Ingratitude, and the elder of
Parricide.'

And if they had been hanged too for those 'Crimes,' cried Thwackum, 'they
would have had no more than their Deserts. A couple of heathenish Villains!
Heaven be praised, we have no Brutus'-now-a-days. I wish, Mr. Square, you would
desist from filling the Minds of my Pupils with such Antichristian Stuff: For
the Consequence must be, while they are under my Care, its being well scourged
out of them again. There is your Disciple Tom almost spoiled already. I
overheard him the other Day disputing with Master Blifil, that there was not
Merit in Faith without Works. I know that is one of your Tenets, and I suppose
he had it from you.'

'Don't accuse me of spoiling him,' says Square who taught him to laugh at
whatever is virtuous and decent, and fit and right in the Nature of Things. He
is your own Scholar, and I disclaim him. No, no, Master Blifil is my Boy. Young
as he is, tha^ Lad's Notions of moral Rectitude I defy you eve^ to eradicate.'

Thwackum put on a contemptuous Sneer at this and replied, 'Ay, ay, I will
venture him with you. He is too well grounded for all your philosophical Cant
to hurt. No, no, I have taken Care to instill such Principles into him. -- '

'And I have instilled Principles into him too cries Square. 'What but the
sublime Idea of Virtue could inspire a human Mind with the generous Thought of
giving Liberty. And I repeat to yo^ again, if it was a fit thing to be proud, I
might claim the Honor of having infused that Idea -- '

'And if Pride was not forbidden,' said Thwackum 'I might boast of having
taught him that Duty which he himself assigned as his Motive.'

'So between you both,' says the Squire, 'the your Gentleman has been taught
to rob my Daughter other Bird. I find I must take Care of my Partridg^ Mew. I
shall have some virtuous, religious Man or other ^^t all my Partridges at
Liberty.' The slapping a Gentleman of the Law, who was pres^n^ on the Back. He
cried out, 'What say you to this, Mr. Counselor? Is not this against Law?'

The Lawyer, with great Gravity, delivered himself as follows:

'If the Case be put of a Partridge, there can be no Doubt but an Action would
lie: For though this be ferae Naturae, yet being reclaimed, Property vests; but
being the Case of a Singing Bird, though reclaimed, as it is a Thing of base
Nature, it must be considered as nullius in Bonis. In this Case, therefore, I
conceive the Plaintiff must be nonsuited; and I should disadvise the bringing
any such Action.'

'Well, (says the Squire) if it be nullus Bonus, let us drink about, and talk a
little of the State of the Nation, or some such Discourse that we all
understand; for I am sure I don't understand a Word of this. It may be Learning
and Sense for aught I know; but you shall never persuade me into it. Pox! you
have neither of you mentioned a Word of that poor Lad who deserves to be
commended. To venture breaking his Neck to oblige my Girl, was a generous
spirited Action; I have Learning enough to see that. D -- n me, here is Tom's
Health, I shall love the Boy for it the longest Day I have to live.'

Thus was this Debate interrupted; but it would ^robably have been soon
resumed, had not Mr. Allworthy presently called for his Coach, and carried off
^he two Combatants.

Such was the Conclusion of this Adventure of the Bird, and the Dialogue
occasioned by it, which we ^ould not help recounting to our Reader, though it
^appened some Years before the Stage, or Period of Time, at which our History
is now arrived.

CHAP. V.
Containing Matter accommodated to every Taste.

PARVA leves capiunt Animos, 'Small Things affect light Minds,' was the
Sentiment of a great Master of the Passion of Love. And certain it is, that
from this Day Sophia began to have some little Kindness for Tom Jones, and no
little Aversion for his Companion.

Many Accidents from time to time improved both these Passions in her Breast;
which, without our recounting, the Reader may well conclude, from what we have
before hinted of the different Tempers of these Lads, and how much the one
suited with her own Inclinations more than the other. To say the Truth, Sophia,
when very young, discerned that Tom, though an idle, thoughtless, rattling
Rascal, was nobody's Enemy but his own; and that Master Blifil, though a
prudent, discreet, sober young Gentleman, was at the same Time strongly
attached to the Interest only of one single Person; and who that single Person
was, the Reader will be able to divine without any Assistance of ours.

These two Characters are not always received in the World with the different
Regard which seems severally due to either; and which one would imagine
Mankind, from self-interest, should show toward them. But perhaps there may be
a political Reason for it: In finding one of a truly benevolent Disposition,
Men may very reasonably suppose, they have found a Treasure, and be desirous of
keeping it, like all other good Things, to themselves. Hence they may imagine,
that to trumpet forth the Praises of such a Person, would, in the vulgar
Phrase, be crying Roastmeat; and calling in Partakers of what they intend to
apply solely to their own Use. If this Reason does not satisfy the Reader, I
know no other Means of accounting for the little Respect which I have commonly
seen paid to a Character which really does great Honor to Human Nature, and is
productive of the highest Good to Society. But it was otherwise with Sophia.
She honored Tom Jones, and scorned Master Blifil, almost as soon as she knew
the Meaning of those two Words.

Sophia had been absent upwards of three Years with her Aunt; during all which
Time she had seldom seen either of these young Gentlemen. She dined, however,
once together with her Aunt, at Mr. Allworthy's. This was a few Days after the
Adventure of the Partridge, before commemorated. Sophia heard the whole Story
at Table, where she said nothing; nor indeed could her Aunt get many Words from
her, as she returned home; but her Maid, when undressing her, happening to say,
'Well, Miss, I suppose you have seen young Master Blifil to Day.' She answered
with much Passion, 'I hate the Name of Master Blifil, as I do whatever is base
and treacherous; and I wonder Mr. Allworthy would suffer that old barbarous
Schoolmaster to punish a poor Boy so cruelly for what was only the Effect of
his Goodnature.' She then recounted the Story to her Maid, and concluded with
Saying -- 'Don't you think he is a Boy of a noble Spirit?'

This young Lady was now returned to her Father; who gave her the Command of
his House, and placed her at the upper End of his Table, where Tom (who from
his great Love of Hunting was become a great Favorite of the Squire) often
dined. Young Men of open, generous Dispositions are naturally inclined to
Gallantry, which, if they have good understandings, as was in reality Tom's
Case, exerts itself in an obliging, complaisant Behavior to all Women in
general. This greatly distinguished Tom from the boisterous Brutality of mere
Country Squires on the one hand; and from the solemn, and somewhat fullen,
Deportment of Master Blifil on the other: And he began now, at Nineteen, to
have the Name of a pretty Fellow among all the Women in the Neighborhood.

Tom behaved to Sophia with no Particularity, unless, perhaps, by showing her a
higher Respect than he paid to any other. This Distinction her Beauty, Fortune,
Sense, and amiable Carriage, seemed to demand; but as to Design upon her Person
he had none; for which we shall at present suffer the Reader to condemn him of
Stupidity; but perhaps we shall be able indifferently well to account for it
hereafter.

Sophia, with the highest Degree of Innocence and Modesty, had a remarkable
Sprightliness in her Temper. This was so greatly increased whenever she was in
Company with Tom, that, had he not been very young and thoughtless, he must
have observed it; or had not Mr. Western's Thoughts been generally either in
the Field, the Stable, or the Dog-kennel, it might have, perhaps, created some
Jealousy in him; but so far was the good Gentleman from entertaining any such
Suspicions, that he gave Tom every Opportunity with his Daughter which any
Lover could have wished. And these Tom innocently improved to better Advantage,
by following only the Dictates of his natural Gallantry and goodnature, than
he might, perhaps, have done, had he had the deepest Designs on the young Lady.

But, indeed, it can occasion little Wonder that this Matter escaped the
Observation of others, since poor Sophia herself never remarked it, and her
Heart was irretrivably lost before she suspected it was in Danger.

Matters were in this Situation, when Tom one Afternoon finding Sophia alone,
began, after a short Apology, with a very serious Face, to acquaint her, that
he had a Favor to ask of her, which he hoped her Goodness would comply with.

Though neither the young Man's Behavior, nor indeed his Manner of opening
this Business, were such as could give her any just Cause of suspecting he
intended to make Love to her; yet, whether Nature whispered something into her
Ear, or from what Cause it arose I will not determine, certain it is, some Idea
of that Kind must have intruded itself; for her Color forsook her Cheeks, her
Limbs trembled, and her Tongue would have faultered, had Tom stopped for an
Answer: But he soon relieved her from her Perplexity, by proceeding to inform
her of his Request, which was to solicit her Interest on Behalf of the
Game-keeper, whose own Ruin, and that of a large Family, must be, he said, the
Consequence of Mr. Western's pursuing his Action against him.

Sophia presently recovered her Confusion, and with a Smile full of Sweetness,
said, 'Is this the mighty Favor you asked with so much Gravity. I will do it
with all my Heart. I really pity the poor Fellow, and no longer ago than
Yesterday sent a small Matter to his Wife.' This small Matter was one of her
Gowns, some Linen, and ten Shillings in Money, of which Tom had heard, and it
had, in reality, put this Solicitation into his Head.

Our Youth, now emboldened with his Success, resolved to push the Matter
farther; and ventured even to beg her Recommendation of him to her Father's
Service; protesting that he thought him one of the honestest Fellows in the
Country, and extremely well qualified for the Place of a Game-keeper, which
luckily then happened to be vacant.

Sophia answered; 'Well, I will undertake this too; but I cannot promise you as
much Success as in the former Part, which I assure you I will not quit my
Father without obtaining. However, I will do what I can for the poor Fellow,
for I sincerely look upon him and his Family as Objects of great Compassion.'
-- 'And now, Mr. Jones, I must ask' you a Favor. -- '

'A Favor, Madam, (cries Tom) if you knew the Pleasure you have given me in
the Hopes of receiving a Command from you, you would think by mentioning it you
must confer the greatest Favor on me; for by this dear Hand I would sacrifice
my Life to oblige you.'

He then snatched her Hand, and eagerly kissed it, which was the first Time his
Lips had ever touched her. The Blood, which before had forsaken her Cheeks, now
made her sufficient Amends, by rushing all over her Face and Neck with such
Violence, that they became all of a scarlet Color. She now first felt a
Sensation to which she had been before a Stranger, and which, when she had
Leisure to reflect on it, began to acquaint her with some Secrets, which the
Reader, if he does not already guess them, will know in due Time.

Sophia, as soon as she could speak (which was not instantly) informed him,
that the Favor she had to desire of him, was not to lead her Father through so
many Dangers in Hunting; for that, from what she had heard, she was terribly
frightened every Time they went out together, and expected some Day or other to
see her Father brought Home with broken Limbs. She therefore begged him, for
her Sake, to be more cautious; and, as he well knew Mr. Western would follow
him, not to ride so madly, nor to take those dangerous Leaps for the future.

Tom faithfully promised to obey her Commands; and after thanking her for her
kind Compliance with his Request, took his Leave, and departed highly charmed
with his Success.

Poor Sophia was charmed too; but in a very different Way. Her Sensations,
however, the Reader's Heart, (if he or she have any) will better represent than
I can, if I had as many Mouths as ever Poet wished for, to eat, I suppose,
those many Dainties with which he was so plentifully provided.

It was Mr. Western's Custom every Afternoon, as soon as he was drunk, to hear
his Daughter play on the Harpsichord: for he was a great Lover of Music, and
perhaps, had he lived in Town, might have passed for a Connoisseur: for he
always excepted against the finest Compositions of Mr. Handel. He never
relished any Music but what was light and airy; and indeed his most favorite
Tunes, were Old Sir Simon the King, St. George, he was for England, Bobbing
Joan, and some others.

His Daughter though she was a perfect Mistress of Music, and would never
willingly have played any but Handel's, was so devoted to her Father's
Pleasure, that she learnt all those Tunes to oblige him. However, she would now
and then endeavor to lead him into her our own Taste, and when he required the
Repetition of his Ballads, would answer with a 'Nay, dear Sir,' and would often
beg him to suffer her to play something else.

This Evening, however, when the Gentleman was retired from his Bottle, she
played all his Favorites three Times over, without any Solicitation. This so
pleased the good Squire, that he started from his Couch, gave his Daughter a
Kiss, and swore her Hand was greatly improved. She took this Opportunity to
execute her promise to Tom, in which she succeeded so well, that the Squire
declared, if she would give him the other Bout of old Sir Simon, he would give
the Game-keeper his Deputation the next Morning. Sir Simon was played again and
again, till the Charms of the Music soothed Mr. Western to sleep. In the
Morning Sophia did not fail to remind him of his Engagement, and his Attorney
was immediately sent for, ordered to stop any further proceedings in the
Action, and to make out the Deputation.

Tom's Success in this Affair soon began to ring over the Country, and various
were the Censures past upon it. Some greatly applauded it as an Act of good
Nature, others sneering, and saying, 'No Wonder that one idle Fellow should
love another.' Young Blifil was greatly enraged at it. He had long hated Black
George in the same Proportion as Jones delighted in him; not for any offense
which he had ever received, but from his great Love to Religion and Virtue: For
Black George had the Reputation of a loose kind of a Fellow. Blifil therefore
represented this as flying in Mr. Allworthy's Face; and declared with great
Concern, that it was impossible to find any other Motive for doing Good to such
a Wretch.

Thwackum and Square likewise sung to the same Tune: They were now (especially
the latter) become greatly jealous of young Jones with the Widow: For he now
approached the Age of Twenty, was really a fine young Fellow; and that Lady, by
her Encouragements to him, seemed daily more and more to think him so.

Allworthy was not, however, moved with their Malice. He declared himself very
well satisfied with what Jones had done. He said, the Perseverance and
Integrity of his Friendship was highly commendable, and he wished he could see
more frequent Instances of that Virtue.

But Fortune who seldom greatly relishes such Sparks as my Friend Tom, perhaps,
because they do not pay more ardent Addresses to her, gave now a very different
Turn to all his Actions, and showed them to Mr. Allworthy in a Light far less
agreeable than that Gentleman's Goodness had hitherto seen them in.

CHAP. VI.
An Apology for the Insensibility of Mr. Jones, to all the Charms of the lovely
Sophia; in which possibly we may, in a considerable Degree, lower his Character
in the Estimation of those Men of Wit and Gallantry, who approve the Heroes in
most of our modern Comedies.

THERE are two Sorts of People, who I am afraid, have already conceived some
Contempt for my Hero, on Account of his Behavior to Sophia. The former of
these will blame his Prudence in neglecting an Opportunity to possess himself
of Mr. Western's Fortune; and the latter will no less despise him for his
Backwardness to so fine a Girl, who seemed ready to fly into his Arms, if he
would open them to receive her.

Now, though I shall not perhaps be able absolutely to acquit him of either of
these Charges; (for Want of Prudence admits of no Excuse; and what I shall
produce against the latter Charge, will, I apprehend, be scarce satisfactory;)
yet as Evidence may sometimes be offered in Mitigation, I shall set forth the
plain Matter of Fact, and leave the whole to the Reader's Determination.

Mr. Jones had somewhat about him, which, though I think Writers are not
thoroughly agreed in its Name, does certainly inhabit some human Breasts; whose
Use is not so properly to distinguish Right from Wrong, as to prompt and incite
them to the former, and to restrain and withold them from the latter.

This Somewhat may be indeed resembled to the famous Trunk-maker in the
Playhouse: for whenever the Person who is possessed of it does what is right,
no ravished or friendly Spectator is so eager, or so loud in his Applause; on
the contrary, when he does wrong, no Critic is so apt to hiss and explode him.

To give a higher Idea of the Principle I mean, as well as one more familiar to
the present Age; it may be considered as sitting on its Throne in the Mind,
like the LORD HIGH CHANCELLOR of this Kingdom in his Court; where it presides,
governs, directs, judges, acquits and condemns according to Merit and Justice;
with a Knowledge which nothing escapes, a Penetration which nothing can
deceive, and an Integrity which nothing can corrupt.

This Active Principle may perhaps be said to constitute the most essential
Barrier between us, and our Neighbors the Brutes; for if there be some in the
human Shape, who are not under any such Dominion, I choose rather to consider
them as Deserters from us to our Neighbors; among whom they will have the Fate
of Deserters, and not be placed in the first Rank.

Our Hero, whether he derived it from Thwackum or Square I will not determine,
was very strongly under the Guidance of this Principle: for though he did not
always act rightly, yet he never did otherwise without feeling and suffering
for it. It was this which taught him, that to repay the Civilities and little
Friendships of Hospitality by robbing the House where you have received them,
is to be the basest and meanest of Thieves. He did not think the Baseness of
this Offense lessened by the Height of the Injury committed; on the contrary,
if to steal another's Plate deserved Death and Infamy, it seemed to him
difficult to assign a Punishment adequate to the robbing a Man of his whole
Fortune, and of his Child into the Bargain.

This Principle therefore prevented him from any Thought of making his Fortune
by such Means (for this, as I have said, is an active Principle, and does not
content itself with Knowledge or Belief only.) Had he been greatly enamoured of
Sophia, he possibly might have thought otherwise; but give me Leave to say,
there is great Difference between running away with a Man's Daughter from the
Motive of Love, and doing the same Thing from the Motive of Theft.

Now though this young Gentleman was not insensible of the Charms of Sophia;
though he greatly liked her Beauty, and esteemed all her other Qualifications,
she had made, however, no deep Impression on his Heart: For which, as it
renders him liable to the Charge of Stupidity, or at least of Want of Taste, we
shall now proceed to account.

The Truth then is, his Heart was in the Possession of another Woman. Here I
question not, but the Reader will be surprised at our long Taciturnity as to
this Matter; and at no less Loss to divine who this Woman was; since we have
hitherto not dropped a Hint of any one likely to be a Rival to Sophia: For as to
Mrs. Blifil, though we have been obliged to mention some Suspicions of her
Affection for Tom, we have not hitherto given the least Latitude for imagining
that he had any for her; and, indeed, I am sorry to say it, but the Youth of
both Sexes are too apt to be deficient in their Gratitude, for that Regard with
which Persons more advanced in Years are sometimes so kind to honor them.

That the Reader may be no longer in Suspense, he will be pleased to remember,
that we have often mentioned the Family of George Seagrim, commonly called
Black George, the Game-keeper, which consisted at present of a Wife and five
Children.

The second of these Children was a Daughter, whose Name was Molly, and who was
esteemed one of the handsomest Girls in the whole Country.

Congreve well says, There is in true Beauty something which vulgar Souls
cannot admire; so can no Dirt or Rags hide this Something from those Souls
which are not of the vulgar Stamp.

The Beauty of this Girl made, however, no Impression on Tom, till she grew
toward the Age of Sixteen, when Tom, who was near three Years older, began
first to cast the Eyes of Affection upon her. And this Affection he had fixed
on the Girl long before he could bring himself to attempt the Possession of her
Person: for though his Constitution urged him greatly to this, his Principles no
less forcibly restrained him. To debauch a young Woman, however low her
Condition was, appeared to him a very heinous Crime; and the Good Will he bore
the Father, with the Compassion he had for his Family, very strongly
corroborated all such sober Reflections; so that he once resolved to get the
better of his Inclinations, and he actually abstained three whole Months
without ever going to Seagrim's House, or seeing his Daughter.

Now though Molly was, as we have said, generally thought a very fine Girl, and
in reality she was so, yet her Beauty was not of the most amiable Kind. It had
indeed very little of Feminine in it, and would at least have become a Man as
well as a Woman; for, to say the Truth, Youth and florid Health had a very
considerable Share in the Composition.

Nor was her Mind more effeminate than her Person. As this was tall and robust,
so was that bold and forward. So little had she of Modesty, that Jones had more
Regard for her Virtue than she herself. And as most probably she liked Tom as
well as he liked her, so when she perceived his Backwardness, she herself grew
proportionably forward; and when she saw he had entirely deserted the House,
she found Means of throwing herself in his Way, and behaved in such a Manner,
that the Youth must have had very much, or very little of the Hero, if her
Endeavors had proved unsuccessful. In a Word, she soon triumphed over all the
virtuous Resolutions of Jones: For though she behaved at last with all decent
Reluctance, yet I rather choose to attribute the Triumph to her, Since, in Fact,
it was her Design which succeeded.

In the Conduct of this Matter, Molly so well played her Part, that Jones
attributed the Conquest entirely to himself, and considered the young Woman as
one who had yielded to the violent Attacks of his Passion. He likewise imputed
her yielding, to the ungovernable Force of her Love toward him; and this the
Reader will allow to have been a very natural and probable Supposition, as we
have more than once mentioned the uncommon Comeliness of his Person: And indeed
he was one of the handsomest young Fellows in the World.

As there are some Minds whose Affections, like Master Blifl's, are solely
placed on one single Person, whose Interest and indulgence alone they consider
on every Occasion; regarding the Good and Ill of all others as merely
indifferent, any farther than as they contribute to the Pleasure or Advantage
of that Person: So there is a different Temper of Mind which borrows a Degree
of Virtue even from Self-love; such can never receive any kind of Satisfaction
from another, without loving the Creature to whom that Satisfaction is owing,
and without making its Wellbeing in some sort necessary to their own Ease.

Of this latter Species was our Hero. He considered this poor Girl as one
whose Happiness or Misery he had caused to be dependent on himself. Her Beauty
was still the Object of Desire, though greater Beauty, or a fresher Object,
might have been more so; but the little Abatement which Fruition had occasioned
to this, was highly overballanced by the Considerations of the Affection which
she visibly bore him, and of the Situation into which he had brought her. The
former of these created Gratitude, the latter Compassion; and both together
with his Desire for her Person, raised in him a Passion, which might, without
any great Violence to the Word, be called Love; though, perhaps, it was at
first not very judiciously placed.

This then was the true Reason of that Insensibility which he had shown of the
Charms of Sophia, and of that Behavior in her, which might have been
reasonable enough interpreted as an Encouragement to his Addresses: For as he
could not think of abandoning his Molly, poor and destitute as she was, so no
more could he entertain a Notion of betraying such a Creature as Sophia. And
surely, had he given the least Encouragement to any Passion for that young
Lady, he must have been absolutely guilty of one or other of those Crimes;
either of which would, in my Opinion, have very justly subjected him to that
Fate, which at his first Introduction into this History, I mentioned to have
been generally predicted as his certain Destiny.

CHAP. VII.
Being the shortest Chapter in this Book.

HER Mother first perceived the Alteration in the Shape of Molly, and in order
to hide it from her Neighbors, she foolishly clothed her in that Sack which
Sophia had sent her. Though indeed that young Lady had little Apprehension,
that the poor Woman would have been weak enough to let any of her Daughters
wear it in that Form.

Molly was charmed with the first Opportunity she had ever had of showing her
Beauty to Advantage; for though she could very well bear to contemplate herself
in the Glass, even when dressed in Rags; and though she had in that Dress
conquered the Heart of Jones, and perhaps of some others; yet she thought the
Addition of Finery would much improve her Charms, and extend her Conquests.

Molly, therefore, having dressed herself out in this Sack, with a new laced
Cap, and some other Ornaments which Tom had given her, repairs to Church with
her Fan in her Hand the very next Sunday. The Great are deceived, if they
imagine they have appropriated Ambition and Vanity to themselves. These noble
Qualities flourish as notably in a Country Church, and Churchyard, as in the
Drawing Room, or in the Closet. Schemes have indeed been laid in the Vestry,
which would hardly disgrace the Conclave. Here is a Ministry, and here is an
Opposition. Here are Plots and Circumventions, Parties and Factions, equal to
those which are to be found in Courts.

Nor are the Women here less practiced in the highest Feminine Arts than their
fair Superiors in Quality and Fortune. Here are prudes and Coquettes. Here are
Dressing and Ogling, Falsehood, Envy, Malice, Scandal; in short, every Thing
which is common to the most splendid Assembly, or politest Circle. Let those of
high Life, therefore, no longer despise the Ignorance of their Inferiors; nor
the Vulgar any longer rail at the Vices of their Betters.

Molly had seated herself some time before she was known by her Neighbors; and
a Whisper ran through the whole Congregation, 'Who is she?' But when she was
discovered, such sneering, gigling, tittering, and laughing, ensued among the
Women, that Mr. Allworthy was obliged to exert his Authority to preserve any
Decency among them.

CHAP. VIII.
A Battle sung by the Muse in the Homerican Style, and which none but the
classical Reader can taste.

MR. Western had an Estate in this Parish; and as his House stood at little
greater Distance from this Church than from his own, he very often came to
divine Service here; and both he and the charming Sophia happened to be present
at this Time.

Sophia was much pleased with the Beauty of the Girl, whom she pitied for her
Simplicity, in having dressed herself in that Manner, as she saw the Envy which
it had occasioned among her Equals. She no sooner came home, than she sent for
the Game-keeper, and ordered him to bring his Daughter to her; saying, She
would provide for her in the Family, and might possibly place the Girl about
her own Person, when her own Maid, who was now going away, had left her.

Poor Seagrim was thunderstruck at this; for he was no Stranger to the Fault in
the Shape of his Daughter. He answered, in a stammering Voice, 'That he was
afraid Molly would be too awkward to wait on her Ladyship, as she had never
been at Service.' 'No matter for that,' says Sophia, 'she will soon improve. I
am pleased with the Girl, and am resolved to try her.'

Black George now repaired to his Wife, on whose prudent Council he depended to
extricate him out of this Dilemma; but when he came thither, he found his House
in some Confusion. So great Envy had this Sack occasioned, that when Mr.
Allworthy and the other Gentry were gone from Church, the Rage which had
hitherto been confined, burst into an Uproar, and having vented itself at first
in opprobrious Words, Laughs, Hisses, and Gestures, betook itself at last to
certain missile Weapons; which, though from their plastic Nature they
threatened neither the Loss of Life or of Limb, were however sufficiently
dreadful to a well-dressed Lady. Molly had too much Spirit to bear this
Treatment tamely. Having therefore -- But hold, as we are diffident of our own
Abilities, let us here invite a superior Power to our Assistance.

Ye Muses then, whoever you are, who love to sing Battles, and principally
thou, who whileom did recount the Slaughter in those Fields where Hudibras
and Trulla fought, if thou were not starved with thy Friend Butler, assist me
on this great Occasion. All things are not in the Power of all.

As a vast Herd of Cows in a rich Farmer's Yard, if, while they are milked,
they hear their Calves at a Distance lamenting the Robbery which is then
committing, roar and bellow: So roared forth the Somersetshire Mob an Hallaloo,
made up of almost as many Squawls, Screams, and other different Sounds, as
there were Persons, or indeed Passions, among them: Some were inspired by Rage,
others alarmed by Fear, and others had nothing in their Heads but the Love of
Fun; but chiefly Envy, the Sister of Satan, and his constant Companion, rushed
among the Crowd, and blew up the Fury of the Women; who no sooner came up to
Molly, than they pelted her with Dirt and Rubbish.

Molly, having endeavored in vain to make a handsome Retreat, faced about; and
laying hold of ragged Bess, who advanced in the Front of the Enemy, she at one
Blow felled her to the Ground. The whole Army of the Enemy (though near a
hundred in Number) seeing the Fate of their General, gave back many Paces, and
retired behind a new-dug Grave; for the Churchyard was the Field of Battle,
where there was to be a Funeral that very Evening. Molly pursued her Victory,
and catching up a Skull which lay on the Side of the Grave, discharged it with
such Fury, that having hit a Tailor on the Head, the two Skulls sent equally
forth a hollow Sound at their Meeting, and the Tailor took presently measure of
his Length on the Ground, where the Skulls lay side by side, and it was
doubtful which was the most valuable of the two. Molly then taking a Thigh Bone
in her Hand, fell in among the flying Ranks, and dealing her Blows with great
Liberality neither Side, overthrew the Carcass of many a mighty Hero and
Heroine.

Recount, O Muse, the Names of those who fell on this fatal Day. First Jemmy
Tweedle felt on his hinder Head the direful Bone. Him the pleasant Bank of
sweetly winding Stower had nourished, where he first learnt the vocal Art, with
which, wandering up and down at Wakes and Fairs, he cheered the rural Nymphs
and Swains, when upon the Green they interweave the sprightly Dance; while he
himself stood fidling and jumping to his own Music. How little now avails his
Fiddle? He thumps the verdant Floor with his Carcass. Next old Echepole, the
Sowgelder, received a Blow in his Forehead from our Amazonian Heroine, and
immediately fell to the Ground. He was a swinging fat Fellow, and fell with
almost as much Noise as a House. His Tobacco-box dropped at the same Time from
his Pocket, which Molly took up as lawful Spoils. Then Kate of the Mill tumbled
unfortunately over a Tombstone, which catching hold of her ungartered Stocking,
inverted the Order of Nature, and gave her Heels the Superiority to her Head.
Betty Pippin, with young Roger her Lover, fell both to the Ground. Where, O
perverse Fate, she salutes the Earth, and he the Sky. Tom Freckle, the Smith's
Son, was the next Victim to her Rage. He was an ingenious Workman, and made
excellent Pattins; nay the very Pattin with which he was knocked down was his
own Workmanship. Had he been at that Time singing Psalms in the Church, he
would have avoided a broken Head. Miss Crow, the Daughter of a Farmer; John
Giddish, himself a Farmer; Nan Slouch, Esther Codling, Will Spray, Tom Bennet;
the three Misses Potter, whose Father keeps the Sign of the Red Lion. Betty
Chambermaid, Jack Ostler, and many others of inferior Note, lay rolling among
the Graves.

Not that the strenuous Arm of Molly reached all these; for many of them in
their Flight overthrew each other.

But now Fortune fearing she had acted out of Character, and had inclined too
long to the same Side, especially as it was the right Side, hastily turned
about: For now Goody Brown, whom Zekiel Brown cares^es in his Arms; nor he
alone, but half the Parish besides; so famous was she in the Fields of Venus,
nor indeed less in those of Mars. The Trophies of both these, her Husband
always bore about on his Head and Face; for if ever human Head did by its Horns
display the amorous Glories of a Wife, Zekiel's did; nor did his well-scratched
Face less denote her Talents (or rather Talons) of a different Kind.

No longer bore this Amazon the shameful Flight of her Party. She stopped short,
and calling aloud to all who fled, spoke as follows: 'Ye Somersetshire Men, or
rather ye Somersetshire Women, are ye not ashamed, thus to fly from a single
Woman; but if no other will oppose her, I myself and Joan Top here will have
the Honor of the Victory.' Having thus said, she flew at Molly Seagrim, and
easily wrenched the Thigh Bone from her Hand, at the same Time clawing off her
Cap from her Head. Then laying hold of the Hair of Molly, with her Left Hand,
she attacked her so furiously in the Face with the Right, that the Blood soon
began to trickle from her Nose. Molly was not idle this while. She soon removed
the Clout from the Head of Goody Brown, and then fastening on her Hair with one
Hand, with the other she caused the same bloody Stream to issue forth from the
Nostril of the Enemy.

When each of the Combatants had bore off sufficient Spoils of Hair from the
Head of her Antagonist, the next Rage was against their Garments. In this
Attack they exerted so much Violence, that in a very few Minutes, they were
both naked to the middle.

It is lucky for the Women, that the Seat of Fistycuff-War is not the same with
them as among Men; but though they may seem a little to deviate from their Sex,
when they go forth to Battle, yet I have observed they never so far forget it,
as to assail the Bosom, of each other; where a few Blows would be fatal to most
of them. This, I know, some derive from their being of a more bloody
Inclination than the Males. On which Account they apply to the Nose, as to the
Part whence Blood may most easily be drawn; but this seems a far-fetched, as
well as illnatured Supposition.

Goody Brown had great Advantage of Molly in this Particular; for the former
had indeed no Breasts, her Bosom (if it may be so called) as well in Color as
in many other Properties, exactly resembling an ancient Piece of Parchment,
upon which any one might have drummed a considerable while, without doing her
any great Damage.

Molly, besides her present unhappy Condition, was differently formed in those
Parts, and might, perhaps, have attempted the Envy of Brown to give a her fatal
Blow, had not the lucky Arrival of Tom Jones at this Instant put an immediate
End to the bloody Scene.

This Accident was luckily owing to Mr. Square; for he, Master Blifil, and
Jones, had mounted their Horses, after Church, to take the Air, and had ridden
about a Quarter of a Mile, when Square, changing his Mind, (not idly, but for a
Reason which we shall unfold as soon as we have Leisure) desired the young
Gentlemen to ride with him another Way than they had at first purposed. This
Motion being complied with, brought them of Necessity back again to the
Churchyard.

Master Blifil, who rode first, seeing such a Mob assembled, and two Women in
the Posture in which we left the Combatants, stopped his Horse to enquire what
was the Matter. A Country Fellow, scratching his Head, answered him; 'I don't
know Measter un't I; an't please your Honor, here has been a Vight, I think,
between Goody Brown and Mol Seagrim.' 'Who, who, cries Tom?' but without
waiting for an Answer, having discovered the Feathres of his Molly through all
the Discomposure in which they now were, he hastily alighted, turned ^is Horse
loose, and leaping over the Wall, ran to her. She now, first bursting into
Tears, told him how ^arbarously she had been treated. Upon which, forgetting
the Sex of Goody Brown, or perhaps not ^nowing it, in his Rage; for, in
reality, she had no ^eminine Appearance, but a Petticoat, which he might ^ot
observe, he gave her a Lash or two with his Horsewhip; and then flying at the
Mob, who were all accused by Molly, he dealt his Blows so profusely in all
Sides, that unless I would again invoke the ^luse, (which the good-natured
Reader may think a ^^ttle too hard upon her, as she has so lately been
violently sweated) it would be impossible for me to re^ount the Horsewhipping
of that Day.

Having scoured the whole Coast of the Enemy, as well as any of Homer's Heroes
ever did, or as Don Quixotte, or any Knight Errand in the World could ^ave
done, he returned to Molly, whom he found in a Condition, which must give both
me and my Reader Pain, was it to be described here. Tom raved like Madman, beat
his Breast, tore his Hair, stamped ^n the Ground, and vowed the utmost
Vengeance on all who had been concerned. He then pulled off his Coat, and
buttoned it round her, put his Hat upon ^er Head, wiped the Blood from her Face
as well as ^e could with his Handkerchief, and called out to the Servant to
ride as fast as possible for a Side-saddle, or Pillion, that he might carry her
safe home.

Master Blifil objected to the sending away the Servant, as they had only one
with them; but as Square seconded the Order of Jones, he was obliged to comply.

The Servant returned in a very short Time with ^he Pillion, and Molly, having
collected her Rags as well she could, was placed behind him. In which Manner
she was carried home, Square, Blifil and Jones, attending.

Here Jones, having received his Coat, given her a sly Kiss, and whispered her
that he would return i^ the Evening, quitted his Molly, and rode on after his
Companions.

CHAP. IX.
Containing Matters of no very peaceable Color.

MOLLY had no sooner apparelled herself in her accustomed Rags, than her
Sisters began to fall violently upon her; particularly her elder Sister, who
told her she was well enough served. 'How had she the Assurance to wear a Gown
which young Madam Western had given to Mother! If one of us was to wear it, I
think,' says she, 'I myself have the best Right; but I warrant you think it
belongs to your Beauty. I suppose you think yourself more handsomer than any of
us.' 'Hand her down the Bit of Glass from over the Cupboard,' cries another,