
The Clock had now struck Twelve, and every one in the House were in their
Beds, except the Sentinel who stood to guard Northerton, when Jones softly
opening his Door, issued forth in Pursuit of his Enemy, of whose Place of
Confinement he had received a perfect Description from the Drawer. It is not
easy to conceive a much more tremendous Figure than he now exhibited. He had
on, as we have said, a light-coloured Coat, covered with Streams of Blood. His
Face, which missed that very Blood, as well as twenty Ounces more drawn from
him by the Surgeon, was pallid. Round his Head was a Quantity of Bandage, not
unlike a Turban. In the right Hand he carried a Sword, and in the left a
Candle. So that the bloody Banquo was not worthy to be compared to him. In
Fact, I believe a more dreadful Apparition was never raised in a Churchyard,
nor in the Imagination of any good People met in a Winter Evening over a
Christmas Fire in Somersetshire.

When the Sentinel first saw our Hero approach, his Hair began gently to lift
up his Grenadier's Cap; and in the same Instant his Knees fell to Blows with
each other. Presently his whole Body was seized with worse than an Ague Fit. He
then fired his Piece, and fell flat on his Face.

Whether Fear or Courage was the Occasion of his Firing, or whether he took Aim
at the Object of his Terror, I cannot say. If he did, however, he had the good
Fortune to miss his Man.

Jones seeing the Fellow fall, guessed the Cause of his Fright, at which he
could not forbear smiling, not in the least reflecting on the Danger from which
he had just escaped. He then passed by the Fellow, who still continued in the
Posture in which he fell, and entered the Room where Northerton, as he had
heard, was confined. Here, in a solitary Situation he found -- an empty Quart
Pot standing on the Table, on which some Beer being split, looked as if the
Room had lately been inhabited; but at present it was entirely vacant.

Jones then apprehended it might lead to some other Apartment; but, upon
searching all round it, he could perceive no other Door than that at which he
entered, and where the Sentinel had been posted. He then proceeded to call
Northerton several Times by his Name; but no one answered; nor did this serve
to any other Purpose than to confirm the Sentinel in his Terrors, who was now
convinced that the Volunteer was dead of his Wounds, and that his Ghost was
come in Search of the Murderer: He now lay in all the Agonies of Horror, and I
wish, with all my Heart, some of those Actors, who are hereafter to represent a
Man frighted out of his Wits, had seen him, that they might be taught to copy
Nature instead of performing several antic Tricks and Gestures, for the
Entertainment and Applause of the Galleries.

Perceiving the Bird was flown, at least despairing to find him, and rightly
apprehending that the Report of the Firelock would alarm the whole House, our
Hero now blew out his Candle, and gently stole back again to his Chamber, and
to his Bed: Whither he would not have been able to have gotten undiscovered,
had any other Person been on the same Staircase, save only one Gentleman who
was confined to his Bed by the Gout; for before he could reach the Door to his
Chamber, the Hall where the Sentinel had been posted was half full of People.
Some in their Shirts, and others not half dressed, all very earnestly enquiring
of each other, what was the Matter?

The Soldier was now found lying in the same Place and Posture in which we just
before left him. Several immediately applied themselves to raise him, and some
concluded him dead: But they presently saw their Mistake; for he not only
struggled with those who laid their Hands on him, but fell a roaring like a
Bull. In reality, he imagined so many Spirits or Devils were handling him; for
his Imagination being possessed with the Horror of an Apparition, converted
every Object he saw or felt, into nothing but Ghosts and Specter.

At length he was overpowered by Numbers, and got upon his Legs; when Candles
being brought, and seeing two or three of his Comrades present, he came a
little to himself; but when they asked him what was the Matter? he answered, 'I
am a dead Man, that is all, I Am a dead Man. I cannot recover it. I have seen
him.' What have thou seen, Jack,' says one of the Soldiers. 'Why I have seen
the young Volunteer that was killed Yesterday.' He then imprecated the most
heavy Curses on himself, if he had not seen the Volunteer, all over Blood,
vomiting Fire out of his Mouth and Nostrils, pass by him into the Chamber where
Ensign Northerton was, and then seizing the Ensign by the Throat, fly away with
him in a Clap of Thunder.

This Relation met with a gracious Reception from the Audience. All the Women
present believed it firmly, and prayed Heaven to defend them from Murder.
Amongst the Men too, many had Faith in the Story; but others turned it into
Derision and Ridicule; and a Sergeant who was present, answered very coolly:
'Young Man, you will hear more of this for going to sleep, and dreaming on your
Post.'

The Soldier replied, 'You may punish me if you please; but I was as broad
awake as I am now; and the Devil carry me away, as he has the Ensign, if I did
not see the dead Man as I tell you, with Eyes as big and as fiery as two large
Flambeaux.'

The Commander of the Forces, and the Commander of the House, were now both
arrived: For the former being awake at the Time, and hearing the Sentinel fire
his Piece, thought it his Duty to rise immediately, though he had no great
Apprehensions of any Mischief; whereas the Apprehensions of the latter were
much greater, lest her Spoons and Tankards should be upon the March, without
having received any such Orders from her.

Our poor Sentinel, to whom the Sight of this Officer was not much more welcome
than the Apparition, as he thought it, which he had seen before, again related
the dreadful Story, and with many Additions of Blood and Fire: But he had the
Misfortune to gain no Credit with either of the last mentioned Persons; for the
Officer, though a very religious Man, was free from all Terrors of this Kind;
besides, having so lately left Jones in the Condition we have seen, he had no
Suspicion of his being dead. As for the Landlady, though not over religious, she
had no kind of Aversion to the Doctrine of Spirits; but there was a
Circumstance in the Tale which she well knew to be false, as we shall inform
the Reader presently.

But whether Northerton was carried away in Thunder or Fire, or in whatever
other Manner he was gone; it was now certain, that his Body was no longer in
Custody. Upon this Occasion, the Lieutenant formed a Conclusion not very
different from what the Sergeant is just mentioned to have made before, and
immediately ordered the Sentinel to be taken Prisoner. So that, by a strange
Reverse of Fortune (though not very uncommon in a military Life) the Guard became
the Guarded.

CHAP. XV. The Conclusion of the foregoing Adventure.
BESIDES the Suspicion of Sleep, the Lieutenant harbored another, and worse
Doubt against the poor Sentinel, and this was that of Treachery: For as he
believed not one Syllable of the Apparition, so he imagined the whole to be an
Invention, formed only to impose upon him, and that the Fellow had, in Reality,
been bribed by Northerton to let him escape. And this he imagined the rather,
as the Fright appeared to him, the more unnatural in one who had the Character
of as brave and bold a Man as any in the Regiment, having been in several
Actions, having received several Wounds, and in a Word, having behaved himself
always like a good and valiant Soldier.

That the Reader, therefore, may not conceive the least ill Opinion of such a
Person, we shall not delay a Moment in rescuing his Character from the
Imputation of this Guilt.

Mr. Northerton then, as we have before observed, was fully satisfied with the
Glory which he had obtained from this Action. He had, perhaps, seen, or heard,
or guessed, that Envy is apt to attend Fame. Not that I would here insinuate,
that he was heathenishly inclined to believe in, or to worship, the Goddess
Nemesis; for, in fact, I am convinced he never heard of her Name. He was,
besides, of an Active Disposition, and had a great Antipathy to those close
Winter Quarters in the Castle of Gloucester, for which a Justice of Peace might
possibly give him a Billet. Nor was he moreover free from some uneasy
Meditations on a certain wooden Edifice, which I forbear to name, in Conformity
to the Opinion of Mankind, who, I think, rather ought to honor than to be
ashamed of this Building, as it is, or at least might be made, of more Benefit
to Society than almost any other public Erection. In a Word, to hint at no more
Reasons for his Conduct, Mr. Northerton was desirous of departing that Evening,
and nothing remained for him but to contrive the Quomodo, which appeared to be
a Matter of some Difficulty.

Now this young Gentleman, though somewhat crooked in his Morals, was perfectly
strait in his Person, which was extremely strong and well made. His Face too
was accounted handsome by the Generality of Women, for it was broad and ruddy,
with tolerably good Teeth. Such Charms did not fail making an Impression on my
Landlady, who had no little Relish for this kind of Beauty. She had, indeed, a
real Compassion for the young Man; and hearing from the Surgeon that Affairs
were like to go ill with the Volunteer, she suspected they might hereafter wear
no benign Aspect with the Ensign. Having obtained, therefore, leave to make him
a Visit, and finding him in a very melancholy Mood, which she considerably
heightened, by telling him there were scarce any Hopes of the Volunteer's Life,
she proceeded to throw forth some Hints, which the other readily and eagerly
taking up, they soon came to a right Understanding; and it was at length
agreed, that the Ensign should at a certain Signal ascend the Chimney, which
communicating very soon with that of the Kitchen, he might there again let
himself down; for which she would give him an Opportunity, by keeping the Coast
clear.

But lest our Readers, of a different Complexion, should take this Occasion of
too hastily condemning all Compassion as a Folly, and pernicious to Society, we
think proper to mention another Particular, which might possibly have some
little Share in this Action. The Ensign happened to be at this Time possessed
of the Sum of fifty Pounds, which did indeed belong to the whole Company: For
the Captain having quarrelled with his Lieutenant, had entrusted the Payment of
his Company to the Ensign. This Money, however, he thought proper to deposite
in my Landlady's Hand, possibly by way of Bail or Security that he would
hereafter appear and answer to the Charge against him; but whatever were the
Conditions, certain it is, that she had the Money, and the Ensign his Liberty.

The Reader may, perhaps, expect, from the compassionate Temper of this good
Woman, that when she saw the poor Sentinel taken Prisoner for a Fact of which
she knew him innocent, that she should immediately have interposed in his
Behalf; but whether it was that she had already exhausted all her Compassion in
the abovementioned Instance, or that the Features of this Fellow, though not
very different from those of the Ensign, could not raise it, I will not
determine; but so far from being an Advocate for the present Prisoner, she
urged his Guilt to his Officer, declaring with uplifted Eyes and Hands, that
she would not have had any Concern in the Escape of a Murderer for all the
World.

Every thing was now once more quiet; and most of the Company returned again to
their Beds; but the Landlady, either from the natural Activity of her
Disposition, or from her Fear for her Plate, having no Propensity to sleep,
prevailed with the Officers, as they were to march within little more than an
Hour, to spend that Time with her over a Bowl of Punch.

Jones had lain awake all this while, and had heard great Part of the Hurry and
Bustle that had passed, of which he had now some Curiosity to know the
Particulars. He therefore applied to his Bell, which he rung at least twenty
Times without any Effect; for my Landlady was in such high Mirth with her
Company, that no Clapper could be heard there but her own, and the Drawer and
Chambermaid, who were sitting together in the Kitchen (for neither durst he sit
up, nor she lie in Bed alone) the more they heard the Bell ring, the more they
were frightened, and, as it were, nailed down in their Places.

At last, at a lucky Interval of Chat, the Sound reached the Ears of our good
Landlady, who presently sent forth her Summons, which both her Servants
instantly obeyed. 'Joo,' says the Mistress, 'don't you hear the Gentleman's
Bell ring? why don't you go up?' 'It is not my Business,' answered the Drawer,
'to wait upon the Chambers. It is Betty Chambermaid's!' 'If you come to that,'
answered the Maid, 'it is not my Business to wait upon Gentlemen. I have done
it, indeed, some times; but the Devil fetch me if ever I do again, since you
make your Preambles about it.' The Bell still ringing violently, their Mistress
fell into a Passion, and swore, if the Drawer did not go up immediately, she
would turn him away that very Morning. 'If you do, Madam,' says he, 'I cannot
help it. I will not do another Servant's Business.' She then applied herself to
the Maid, and endeavored to prevail by gentle Means; but all in vain, Betty
was as inflexible as Joo. Both insisted it was not their Business, and they
would not do it.

The Lieutenant then fell a laughing, and said, 'Come, I will put an End to
this Contention;' and then turning to the Servants, commended them for their
Resolution, in neither giving up the Point; but added, he was sure, if one
would consent to go, the other would. To which Proposal they both agreed in an
Instant, and accordingly went up very lovingly and close together. When they
were gone, the Lieutenant appeased the Wrath of the Landlady, by satisfying her
why they were both so unwilling to go alone.

They returned soon after, and acquainted their Mistress, that the sick
Gentleman was so far from being dead, that he spoke as heartily as if he was
well; and that he gave his Service to the Captain, and should be very glad of
the Favor of seeing him before he marched.

The good Lieutenant immediately complied with his Desires, and sitting down by
his Bedside acquainted him with the Scene which had happened below, concluding
with his Intentions to make an Example of the Sentinel.

Upon this, Jones related to him the whole Truth, and earnestly begged him not
to punish the poor Soldier, 'who, I am confident,' says he, 'is as innocent of
the Ensign's Escape, as he is of forging any Lie, or of endeavoring to impose
on you.'

The Lieutenant hesitated a few Moments, and then answered: 'Why, as you have
cleared the Fellow of one Part of the Charge, so it will be impossible to prove
the other; because he was not the only Sentinel. But I have a good mind to
punish the Rascal for being a Coward. Yet who knows what Effect the Terror of
such an Apprehension may have; and to say the Truth, he has always behaved
well against an Enemy. Come, it is a good Thing to see any Sign of Religion in
these Fellows; so I promise you he shall be set at liberty when we march. But
hark, the General beats. My dear Boy, give me another Buss. Don't discompose
nor hurry yourself; but remember the Christian Doctrine of Patience, and I
warrant you will soon be able to do yourself Justice, and take to an honorable
Revenge on the Fellow who has injured you.' The Lieutenant then departed, and
Jones endeavored to compose himself to Rest.

THE HISTORY OF A FOUNDLING.
BOOK VIII. Containing above two Days.
CHAP. I. A wonderful long Chapter concerning the Mavelous; being much the
longest of all our introductory Chapters.
AS we are now entering upon a Book, in which the Course of our History will
oblige us to relate some Matters of a more strange and surprising Kind than any
which have hitherto occurred, it may not be amiss in the prolegomenous, or
introductory Chapter, to say something of that Species of Writing which is
called the Mavelous. To this we shall, as well for the Sake of ourselves, as
of others, endeavor to set some certain Bounds; and indeed nothing can be more
necessary, as Critics By this Word here, and in most other Parts of our Work,
we mean every Reader in the World.
of different Complexions are here apt to run into very different Extremes; for
while some are, with M. Dacier, ready to allow, that the same Thing which is
impossible may be yet probable It is happy for M. Dacier that he was not an
Irishman.
, others have so little Historic or Poetic Faith, that they believe nothing to
be either possible or probable, the like to which has not occured to their own
Observation.

First then, I think, it may very reasonably be required of every Writer, that
he keeps within the Bounds of Possibility; and still remembers that what it is
not possible for Man to perform, it is scarce possible for Man to believe he
did perform. This Conviction, perhaps, gave Birth to many Stories of the
ancient Heathen Deities (for most of them are of poetical Original). The Poet,
being desirous to indulge a wanton and extravagant Imagination, took Refuge in
that Power, of the Extent of which his Readers were no Judges, or rather which
they imagined to be infinite, and consequently they could not be shocked at any
Prodigies related of it. This has been strongly urged in Defense of Homer's
Miracles; and it is, perhaps, a Defense; not, as Mr. Pope would have it,
because Ulysses told a set of foolish Lies to the Phaeacians, who were a very
dull Nation; but because the Poet himself wrote to Heathens, to whom poetical
Fables were Articles of Faith. For my own Part, I must confess, so
compassionate is my Temper, I wish Polypheme had confined himself to his Milk
Diet, and preserved his Eye; nor could Ulysses be much more concerned than
myself, when his Companions were turned into Swine by Circe, who showed, I
think, afterward, too much Regard for Man's Flesh to be supposed capable of
converting it into Bacon. I wish, likewise, with all my Heart, that Homer could
have known the Rule prescribed by Horace, to introduce supernatural Agents as
seldom as possible. We should not then have seen his Gods coming on trivial
Errands, and often behaving themselves so as not only to forfeit all Title to
Respect, but to become the Objects of Scorn and Derision. A Conduct which must
have shocked the Credulity of a pious and sagacious Heathen; and which could
never have been defended, unless by agreeing with a Supposition to which I have
been sometimes almost inclined, that this most glorious Poet, as he certainly
was, had an Intent to burlesque the superstious Faith of his own Age and
Country.

But I have rested too long on a Doctrine which can be of no Use to a Christian
Writer: For as he cannot introduce into his Works any of that heavenly Host
which make a Part of his Creed; so is it horrid Puerility to search the Heathen
Theology for any of those Deities who have been long since dethroned from their
Immortality. Lord Shaftsbury observes, that nothing is more cold than the
Invocation of a Muse by a Modern; he might have added that nothing can be more
absurd. A modern may with much more Elegance invoke a Ballad, as some have
thought Homer did, or a Mug of Ale with the Author of Hudibras; which latter
may perhaps have inspired much more Poetry as well as Prose, than all the
Liquors of Hippocrene or Helicon.

The only supernatural Agents which can in any Manner be allowed to us Moderns
are Ghosts; but of these I would advise an Author to be extremely sparing.
These are indeed like Arsenic, and other dangerous Drugs in Physic, to be used
with the utmost Caution; nor would I advise the Introduction of them at all in
those Works, or by those Authors to which, or to whom a Horse-Laugh in the
Reader, would be any great Prejudice or Mortification.

As for Elves and Fairies, and other such Mummery, I purposely omit the Mention
of them, as I should be very unwilling to confine within any Bounds those
surprising Imaginations, for whose Capacity the Limits of human Nature are too
narrow; whose Works are to be considered as a new Creation; and who have
consequently just Right to do what they will with their own.

Man therefore is the highest Subject (unless on very extraordinary Occasions
indeed) which presents itself to the Pen of our Historian, or of our Poet; and
in relating his Actions, great Care is to be taken, that we do not exceed the
Capacity of the Agent we describe.

Nor is Possibility alone sufficient to justify us, we must keep likewise
within the Rules of Probability. It is, I think, the Opinion of Aristotle; or
if not, it is the Opinion of some wise Man, whose Authority will be as weighty,
when it is as old; 'that it is no Excuse for a Poet who relates what is
incredible, that the thing related is really Matter of Fact.' This may perhaps
be allowed true with regard to Poetry, but it may be thought impracticable to
extend it to the Historian: For he is obliged to record Matters as he finds
them; though they may be of so extraordinary a Nature, as will require no small
Degree of historical Faith to swallow them. Such was the successless Armament
of Xerxes, described by Herodotus, or the successful Expedition of Alexander
related by Arrian. Such of later Years was the Victory of Agincourt obtained by
Harry the Fifth, or that of Narva, won by Charles the Twelfth of Sweden. All
which Instances, the more we reflect on them, appear still the more astonishing.

Such Facts, however, as they occur in the Thread of the Story; nay, indeed, as
they constitute the essential Parts of it, the Historian is not only
justifiable in recording as they really happened; but indeed would be
unpardonable, should he omit or alter them. But there are other Facts not of
such Consequence nor so necessary, which though ever so well attested, may
nevertheless be sacrificed to Oblivion in Complaisance to the Skepticism of a
Reader. Such is that memorable Story of the Ghost of George Villers, which
might with more Propriety have been made a Present of to Dr. Drelincourt, to
have kept the Ghost of Mrs. Veale Company, at the Head of his Discourse upon
Death, than have been introduced into so solemn a Work as the History of the
Rebellion.

To say the Truth, if the Historian will confine himself to what really
happened, and utterly reject any Circumstance, which, though never so well
attested, he must be well assured is false, he will sometimes fall into the
Mavelous, but never into the Incredible. He will often raise the Wonder and
Surprise of his Reader, but never that incredulous Hatred mentioned by Horace.
It is by falling into Fiction therefore, that we generally offend against this
Rule, of deserting Probability, which the Historian seldom if ever quits, till
he forsakes his Character, and commences a Writer of Romance. In this, however,
those Historians who relate public Transactions, have the Advantage of us who
confine ourselves to Scenes of private Life. The Credit of the former is by
common Notoriety supported for a long Time; and public Records, with the
concurrent Testimony of many Authors bear Evidence to their Truth in future
Ages. Thus a Trajan and an Antoninus, a Nero and a Caligula, have all met with
the Belief of Posterity; and no one doubts but that Men so very good, and so
very bad, were once the Masters of Mankind.

But we who deal in private Characters, who search into the most retired
Recesses, and draw forth Examples of Virtue and Vice, from Holes and Corners of
the World, are in a more dangerous Situation. As' we have no public Notoriety,
no concurrent Testimony, no Records to support and corroborate what we deliver,
it becomes us not only to keep within the Limits of Possibility, but of
Probability too; and this more especially in painting what is greatly good and
amiable. Knavery and Folly, though never so exorbitant, will more easily meet
with Assent: for Illnature adds great Support and Strength to Faith.

Thus we may, perhaps, with little Danger relate the History of a Fisher; who
having long owed his Bread to the Generosity of Mr. Derby, and having that very
Morning received a considerable Bounty from his Hands, in order to possess
himself of what remained in his Friend's Scrutore, concealed himself in a
public Office of the Temple, through which there was a Passage into Mr. Derby's
Chambers. Here he overheard Mr. Derby for many Hours solacing himself at an
Entertainment which he that Evening gave his Friends, and to which Fisher had
been invited. During all this Time, no tender, no grateful Reflections arose to
restrain his Purpose; but when the poor Gentleman had let his Company out
through the Office, Fisher came suddenly from his lurking Place, and walking
softly behind his Friend into his Chamber, discharged a Pistol Ball into his
Head. This may be believed, when the Bones of Fisher are as rotten as his
Heart. Nay, perhaps, it will be credited that the Villain went two Days
afterward with some young Ladies to the Play of Hamlet; and with an unaltered
Countenance heard one of the Ladies, who little suspected how near she was to
the Person, cry out, Good God! if the Man that murdered Mr. Derby was now
present! Manifesting in this a more seared and callous Conscience than even
Nero himself; of whom we are told by Suetonius, 'that the Consciousness of his
Guilt after the Death of his Mother became immediately intolerable, and so
continued; nor could all the Congratulations of the Soldiers, of the Senate,
and the People, allay the Horrors of his Conscience.'

But now, on the other hand, should I tell my Reader, that I had known a Man
whose penetrating Genius had enabled him to raise a large Fortune in a Way
where no Beginning was chaulked out to him: That he had done this with the most
perfect Preservation of his Integrity, and not only without the least Injustice
or Injury to any one individual Person, but with the highest Advantage to
Trade, and a vast Increase of the public Revenue: That he had expended one Part
of the Income of this Fortune in discovering a Taste superior to most, by Works
where the highest Dignity was united with the purest Simplicity, and another
Part in displaying a Degree of Goodness superior to all Men, by acts of Charity
to Objects whose only Recommendations were their Merits, or their Wants: That
he was most industrious in searching after Merit in Distress, most eager to
relieve it, and then as careful (perhaps too careful) to conceal what he had
done: That his House, his Furniture, his Gardens, his Table, his private
Hospitality, and his public Beneficence all denoted the Mind from which they
flowed, and were all intrinsically rich and noble, without Tinsel, or external
Ostentation: That he filled every Relation in Life with the most adequate
Virtue: That he was most piously religious to his Creator, most zealously loyal
to his Sovereign; a most tender Husband to his Wife, a kind Relation, a
munificent Patron, a warm and firm Friend, a knowing and a cheerful Companion,
indulgent to his Servants, hospitable to his Neighbors, charitable to the
Poor, and benevolent to all Mankind. Should I add to these the Epithits of
wise, brave, elegant, and indeed every other amiable Epithet in our Language, I
might surely say,

-- Quis credet? nemo Hercule! nemo;
Vel duo, vel nemo.
And yet I know a Man who is all I have here described. But a single Instance
(and I really know not such another) is not sufficient to justify us, while we
are writing to thousands who never heard of the Person, nor of any thing like
him. Such Rarae Aves should be remitted to the Epitaph-Writer, or to some Poet,
who may condescend to hitch him in a Distich, or to slide him into a Rhyme with
an Air of Carelessness and Neglect, without giving any Offense to the Reader.

In the last Place, the Actions should be such as may not only be within the
Compass of human Agency, and which human Agents may probably be supposed to do;
but they should be likely for the very Actors and Characters themselves to have
performed: For what may be only wonderful and surprising in one Man, may become
improbable, or indeed impossible, when related of another.

This last Requisite is what the dramatic Critics call Conservation of
Character, and it requires a very extraordinary Degree of Judgment, and a most
exact Knowledge of human Nature.

It is admirably remarked by a most excellent Writer, That Zeal can no more
hurry a Man to act in direct Opposition to itself, than a rapid Stream can
carry a Boat against its own Current. I will venture to say, that for a Man to
act in direct Contradiction to the Dictates of Nature, is, if not impossible,
as improbable and as miraculous as any Thing which can well be conceived.
Should the best Parts of the Story of M. Antoninus be ascribed to Nero, or
should the worst Incidents of Nero's Life be imputed to Antoninus, what would
be more shocking to Belief than either Instance; whereas both these being
related of their proper Agent, constitute the Truly Mavelous.

Our modern Authors of Comedy have fallen almost universally into the Error
here hinted at: Their Heroes generally are notorious Rogues, and their Heroines
abandoned Jades, during the first four Acts; but in the fifth, the former
become very worthy Gentlemen, and the latter, Women of Virtue and Discretion:
Nor is the Writer often so kind as to give himself the least Trouble, to
reconcile or account for this monstrous Change and Incongruity. There is,
indeed, no other Reason to be assigned for it, than because the Play is drawing
to a Conclusion; as if it was no less natural in a Rogue to repent in the last
Act of a Play, than in the last of his Life; which we perceive to be generally
the Case at Tyburn, a Place which might, indeed, close the Scene of some
Comedies with much Propriety, as the Heroes in these are most commonly eminent
for those very Talents which not only bring Men to the Gallows, but enable them
to make an heroic Figure when they are there.

Within these few Restrictions, I think, every Writer may be permitted to deal
as much in the Wonderful as he pleases; nay, the more he can surprise the
Reader, if he thus keeps within the Rules of Credibility, the more he will
engage his Attention, and the more he will charm him. As a Genius of the
highest Rank observes in his 5th Chapter of the Bathos, 'The great Art of all
Poetry is to mix Truth with Fiction; in order to join the Credible with the
Surprising.'

For though every good Author will confine himself within the Bounds of
Probability, it is by no means necessary that his Characters, or his Incidents,
should be trite, common, or vulgar; such as happen in every Street, or in every
House, or which may be met with in the home Articles of a News-paper. Nor must
he be inhibited from showing many Persons and Things, which may possibly have
never fallen within the Knowledge of great Part of his Readers.

If the Writer strictly observes the Rules abovementioned, he has discharged
his Part; and is then entitled to some Faith from his Reader, who is indeed
guilty of critical Infidelity if he disbelieves him. For want of a Portion of
such Faith, I remember the Character of a young Lady of Quality, which was
condemned on the Stage for being unnatural, by the unanimous Voice of a very
large Assembly of Clerks and Apprentices; though it had had the previous
Suffrages of many Ladies of the first Rank; one of whom very eminent for her
Understanding, declared it was the Picture of half the young People of her
Acquaintance.

CHAP. II. In which the Landlady pays a Visit to Mr. Jones.
WHEN Jones had taken Leave of his Friend the Lieutenant, he endeavored to
close his Eyes, but all in vain; his Spirits were too lively and wakeful to be
lulled to Sleep. So having amused, or rather tormented himself with the
Thoughts of his Sophia, till it was open Daylight, he called for some Tea;
upon which Occasion my Landlady herself vouchsafed to pay him a Visit.

This was indeed the first Time she had seen him, or at least had taken any
Notice of him; but as the Lieutenant had assured her that he was certainly some
young Gentleman of Fashion, she now determined to show him all the Respect in
her Power: for, to speak truly, this was one of those Houses where Gentlemen,
to use the Language of Advertisements, meet with civil Treatment for their
Money.

She had no sooner begun to make his Tea, than she likewise began to discourse,
'La! Sir,' said she, I think it is great Pity that such a pretty young
Gentleman should undervalue himself so, as to go about with these Soldier
Fellows. They call themselves Gentlemen, I warrant you; but, as my first
Husband used to say, they should remember it is we that pay them. And to be
sure it is very hard upon us to be obliged to pay them, and to keep 'em too, as
we Publicans are. I had twenty of 'um last Night, besides Officers; nay, for
matter of that, I had rather have the Soldiers than the Officers: For nothing
is ever good enough for those Sparks; and I am sure if you was to see the
Bills; La, Sir, it is nothing. I have had less Trouble, I warrant you, with a
good Squire's Family, where we take forty or fifty Shillings of a Night besides
Horses'. And yet I warrants me, there is narrow a one of all those Officer
Fellows, but looks upon himself to be as good as arrow a Squire of 500l. a
Year. To be sure it does me Good to hear their Men run about after 'um, crying
your Honor, and your Honor. Marry come up with such Honor, and an Ordinary
at a Shilling a Head. Then there is such Swearing among 'um, to be sure, it
frightens me out of my Wits, I think nothing can prosper with such wicked
People. And here one of 'um has used you in so barbarous a Manner. I thought
indeed how well the rest would secure him; they all hang together; for if you
had been in Danger of Death, which I am glad to see you are not, it would have
been all as one to such wicked People. They would have let the Murderer go.
Laud have Mercy upon 'um, I would not have such a Sin to answer for, for the
whole World. But though you are likely, with the Blessing to recover, there is
Laa for him yet, and if you will employ Layer Small, I dare be sworn he will
make the Fellow fly the Country for him; though perhaps, he will have fled the
Country before; for it is here Today and gone Tomorrow with such Chaps. I
hope however, you will learn more Wit for the future, and return back to your
Friends; I warrant they are all miserable for your Loss; and if they was but to
know what had happened. La, my seeming! I would not for the World they should.
Come, come, we know very well what all the Matter is; but if one will not, another
will, so pretty a Gentleman need never want a Lady. I am sure if I was as you,
I would see the finest she that ever wore a Head hanged, before I would go for
a Soldier for her. -- Nay, don't blush so (for indeed he did to a violent
Degree) why, you thought, Sir, I knew nothing of the Matter, I warrant you,
about Madam Sophia.' 'How,' says Jones, starting up, 'do you know my Sophia?'
Do I? ay marry,' cries the Landlady, 'many's the Time has she lain in this
House.' 'With her Aunt, I suppose,' says Jones.' -- 'Why there it is now,'
cries the Landlady. 'Ay, ay, ay, I know the old Lady very well. And a sweet
young Creature is Madam Sophia, that is the truth on it.' 'A sweet Creature!'
cries Jones,' Oh Heavens! Angels are painted fair to look like her.
There Is in her all that we believe of Heaven,
Amazing Brightness, Purity and Truth,
Eternal Joy, and everlasting Love.
'And could I ever have imagined that you had known my Sophia.' 'I wish,' says
the Landlady, 'you knew half so much of her. What would you have given to have
sat by her Bedside? What a delicious Neck she has! Her lovely Limbs have
stretched themselves in that very Bed you now lie in.' 'Here! cries Jones,
'hath Sophia ever lain here? -- 'Ay, ay, here; there; in that very Bed,' says
the Landlady, 'where I wish you had her this Moment; and she may wish so too,
for any thing I know to the contrary: For she has mentioned your Name to me.'
-- 'Ha,' cries he, 'did she ever mention her poor Jones? -- You flatter me now,
I can never believe so much.' Why then,' answered she, 'as I hope to be saved,
and may the Devil fetch me, if I speak a Syllable more than the Truth. I have
heard her mention Mr. Jones; but in a civil and modest Way, I confess; yet I
could perceive she thought a great deal more than she said.' 'O my dear Woman,'
cries Jones, 'her Thoughts of me I shall never be worthy of. O she is all
Gentleness, Kindness, Goodness. Why was such a Rascal as I born, ever to give
her soft Bosom a Moment's Uneasiness? Why am I cursed? I, who would undergo all
the Plagues and Miseries which any Demon ever invented for Mankind, to procure
her any Good; nay, Torture itself could not be Misery to me, did I but know
that she was happy,' 'Why look you there now,' says the Landlady, I told her
you was a constant Lover.' But pray, Madam, tell me when or where you knew any
thing of me; for I never was here before, nor do I remember ever to have seen
you.' 'Nor is it possible you should,' answered she, 'for you was a little
Thing when I had you in my Lap at the Squire's.' -- 'How the Squire's,' said
Jones, what do you know the great and good Mr. Allworthy then?' 'Yes, marry do
I,' says she; 'Who in this Country does not?' -- 'the Fame of his Goodness
indeed,' answered Jones, 'must have extended farther than this; but Heaven only
can know him, can know that Benevolence which is copied from itself, and sent
upon Earth as its own Pattern. Mankind are as ignorant of such divine Goodness,
as they are unworthy of it; but none so unworthy of it as myself. I who was
raised by him to such a Height; taken in, as you well must know, a poor
base-born Child, adopted by him, and treated as his own Son, to dare by my
Follies to disoblige him, to draw his Vengeance upon me. Yes, I deserve it all:
For I will never be so ungrateful as even to think he has done an Act of
Injustice by me. No, I deserve to be turned out of Doors, as I am. And now,
Madam, says he, I believe you will not blame me for turning Soldier,
especially' with such a Fortune as this in my Pocket. At which words he shook a
Purse which had but very little in it, and which still appeared to the Landlady
to have less.

My good Landlady was, (according to vulgar Phrase) struck all of a Heap by
this Relation. She answered coldly, 'That to be sure People were the best
Judges what was most proper for their Circumstances. -- But hark,' says she, 'I
think I hear some body call. Coming! coming! the Devil's in all our Volk,
nobody has any Ears. I must go down Stairs, if you want any more Breakfast,'
the Maid will come up. Coming!' At which Words, without taking any Leave, she
flung out of the Room: For the lower Sort of People are very tenacious of
Respect; and though they are contented to give this gratis to Persons of Quality,
yet they never confer it on those of their own Order, without taking Care to be
paid for their Pains.

CHAP. III. In which the Surgeon makes his second Appearance.
BEFORE we proceed any farther, that the Reader may not be mistaken in
imagining the Landlady knew more than she did, nor surprised that she knew so
much, it may be necessary to inform him, that the Lieutenant had acquainted her
that the Name of Sophia had been the Occasion of the Quarrel; and as for the
rest of her Knowledge, the sagacious Reader will observe how she came by it in
the preceding Scene. Great Curiosity was indeed mixed with her Virtues; and she
never willingly suffered any one to depart from her House without enquiring as
much as possible into their Names, Families and Fortunes.

She was no sooner gone, than Jones, instead of animadverting on her Behavior,
reflected that he was in the same Bed, which he was informed had held his dear
Sophia. This occasioned a thousand fond and tender Thoughts, which we would
dwell longer upon, did we not consider that such kind of Lovers will make a
very inconsiderable Part of our Readers.

In this Situation the Surgeon found him, when he came to dress his Wound. The
Doctor, perceiving upon Examination, that his Pulse was disordered, and hearing
that he had not slept, declared that he was in great Danger: For he apprehended
a Fever was coming on; which he would have prevented by bleeding, but Jones
would not submit, declaring he would lose no more Blood; and 'Doctor,' says he,
'if you will be so kind only to dress my Head, I have no Doubt of being well in
a Day or two.'

'I wish,' answered the Surgeon, 'I could assure your being well in a Month or
two. Well, indeed! No, no, People are not so soon well of such Contusions; but,
Sir, I am not at this Time of Day to be instructed in my Operations by a
Patient, and a insist on making a Revulsion before I dress you.'

Jones persisted obstinately in his Refusal, and the Doctor at last yielded;
telling him at the same Time, that he would not be answerable for the ill
Consequence, and hoped he would do him the Justice to acknowledge that he had
given him a contrary Advice; which the Patient promised he would.

The Doctor retired into the Kitchen, where, addressing himself to the
Landlady, he complained bitterly of the undutiful Behavior of his Patient, who
would not be blooded, though he was in a Fever.

'It is an eating Fever then,' says the Landlady: 'For he has devoured two
swinging buttered Toasts this Morning for Breakfast.'

'Very likely,' says the Doctor, 'I have known People eat in a Fever; and it is
very easily accounted for; because the Acidity occasioned by the febrile
Matter, may stimulate the Nerves of the Diaphragm, and thereby occasion a
Craving, which will not be easily distinguishable from a natural Appetite; but
the Aliment will not be concreted, nor assimilated into Chyle, and so will
corrode the vascular Orifices, and thus will aggravate the febrific Symptoms.
Indeed I think the Gentleman in a very dangerous Way, and, if he is not
blooded, I am afraid will die.'

'Every Man must die some Time or other,' answered the good Woman; 'it is no
Business of mine. I hope, Doctor, you would not have me hold him while you
bleed him. -- But, harkee, a Word in your Ear, I would advise you before you
proceed too far, to take care who is to be your Paymaster.'

'Paymaster! said the Doctor, staring, why, I Have a Gentleman under my Hands,
have I not?'

'I imagined so as well as you,' said the Landlady; 'but as my first Husband
used to say, every Thing is not what it looks to be. He is an arrant Scrub, I
assure you. However, take no Notice that I mentioned any thing to you of the
Matter; but I think People in Business often always to let one another know such
Things.'

'And have I suffered such a Fellow as this,' cries the Doctor, in a Passion,
'to instruct me? Shall I hear my Practice insulted by one who will not pay me!
I am glad I have made this Discovery in Time. I will see now whether he will be
blooded or no.' He then immediately went up Stairs, and flinging open the Door
of the Chamber with much Violence, awaked poor Jones from a very sound Nap,
into which he was fallen, and what was still worse, from a delicious dream
concerning Sophia.

'Will you be blooded or no?' cries the Doctor, in a Rage. 'I have told you my
Resolution already,' answered Jones, 'and I wish with all my Heart you had
taken my answer: For you have awaked me out of the sweetest Sleep which I ever
had in my Life.'

'Ay, ay,' cries the Doctor, 'many a Man has dosed away his Life. Sleep is not
always good, no more than Food; but remember I demand of you, for the last
Time, will you be blooded?' 'I answer you for the last Time, said Jones, I will
not.' 'Then I wash my Hands of you,' cries the Doctor, 'and I desire you to pay
me for the Trouble I have had already. Two Journeys at 5s. each, two Dressings
at 5s. more, and half a Crown for Phlebotomy.' 'I hope,' said Jones, you don't
intend to leave me in this Condition.' 'Indeed but I shall,' said the other.
'Then said Jones, you have used me rascally, and I will not pay you a
farthing.' 'Very well,' cries the Doctor, 'the first Loss is the best. What a
Pox did my Landlady mean by sending for me to such Vagabonds?' At which Words
he flung out of the Room, and his Patient turned himself about, soon recovered
his Sleep; but his Dream was unfortunately gone.

CHAP. IV. In which is introduced one of the pleasantest Barbers that was ever
recorded in History, the Barber of Bagdad, nor he in Don Quixote not excepted.
THE Clock had now struck Five, when Jones awaked from a Nap of seven Hours, so
much refreshed, and in such perfect Health and Spirits, that he resolved to get
up and dress himself: for which Purpose he unlocked his Portmanteau, and took
out clean Linen, and a Suit of Clothes; but first he slipped on a Frock, and
went down into the Kitchen to bespeak something that might pacify certain
Tumults he found rising within his Stomach.

Meeting the Landlady, he accosted her with great Civility, and asked 'what he
could have for Dinner.' 'For Dinner! says she, 'it is an odd Time a Day to
think of Dinner. There is nothing dressed in the House, and the Fire is almost
out: Well but,' says he, 'I must have something to eat, and it is almost
indifferent to me what: For to tell you the Truth, I never was more hungry in
my Life.' 'Then,' says she, 'I believe there is a Piece of cold Buttock and
Carrot, which will fit you.' -- 'Nothing better,' answered Jones, 'but I should
be obliged to you, if you would let it be fried.' To which the Landlady
consented, and said smiling, 'she was glad to see him so well recovered:' For
the Sweetness of our Hero's Temper was almost irresistible; besides, she was
really no ill-humoured Woman at the Bottom; but she loved Money so much, that
she hated every Thing which had the Semblance of Poverty.

Jones now returned in order to dress himself, while his Dinner was preparing,
and was, according to his Orders, attended by the Barber.

This Barber, who went by the Name of little Benjamin, was a Fellow of great
Oddity and Humor, which had frequently led him into small Inconveniences,
such as Slaps in the Face, Kicks in the Breech, broken Bones, etc. For every
one does not understand a Jest; and those who do, are often displeased with
being themselves the Subjects of it. This Vice was, however, incurable in him;
and though he had often smarted for it, yet if ever he conceived a Joke, he was
certain to be delivered of it, without the least Respect of Persons, Time, or
Place.

He had a great many other Particularities in his Character, which I shall not
mention, as the Reader himself will very easily perceive them, on his farther
Acquaintance with this extraordinary Person.

Jones being impatient to be dressed, for a Reason which may be easily imagined,
thought the Shaver was very tedious in preparing his Suds, and begged him to
make Haste; to which the other answered, with Gravity: For he never discomposed
his Muscles on any Account. 'Festina lent is a Proverb which I learnt long
before I ever touched a Razor.' 'I find, Friend, you are a Scholar,' replied
Jones, 'A poor one,' said the Barber, 'non omnia possumus omnes. Again!' said
Jones; 'I fancy you are good at capping Verses.' Excuse me Sir,' said the
Barber, 'non tanti me dignor honor.' And then proceeding to his Operation,
'Sir,' said he, 'since I have dealt in Suds, I could never discover more than
two Reasons for shaving, the one is to get a Beard, and the other to get rid of
one. I conjecture, Sir, it may not be long since you were shaved from the
former of these Motives. Upon my Word you have had good Success, for one may
say of your Beard, that it is Tondenti gravior.' 'I conjecture, says Jones,
that thou art a very comical Fellow.' 'You mistake me widely, Sir,' said the
Barber, 'I am too much addicted to the Study of Philosophy. Hinc illae
lachrymae, Sir, that is my Misfortune. Too much Learning has been my ruin.'
'Indeed,' says Jones, 'I confess, Friend, you have more Learning than generally
belongs to your Trade; but I cannot see how it can have injured you.' 'Alas,
Sir,' answered the Shaver, 'my Father disinherited me for it. He was a
Dancing Master; and because I could read, before I could dance, he took an
Aversion to me, and left every Farthing among his other Children. -- Will you
please to have your Temples -- O la! I ask your Pardon, I fancy there is Hiatus
in manuscriptis. I heard you was going to the Wars: but I find it was a
Mistake.' Why do you conclude so?' says Jones. Sure, Sir,' answered the Barber,
'you are too wise a Man to carry a broken Head thither; for that would be
carrying Coals to Newcastle.'

'Upon my word,' cries Jones, 'thou art a very odd Fellow, and I like thy
Humor extremely; I shall be very glad if thou will come to me after Dinner,
and drink a Glass with me; I long to be' better acquainted with thee.

'O dear Sir,' said the Barber, 'I can do you twenty times as great a Favor,
if you will accept of it.' 'What is that, my Friend,' cries Jones. 'Why, I will
drink a Bottle with you, if you please; for I dearly love Goodnature, and as
you have found me out to be a comical Fellow, so I have no Skill in
Physiognomy, if you are not one of the bestnatured Gentlemen in the Universe.'
Jones now walked down Stairs neatly dressed, and perhaps the famed Adonis was not
a lovelier Figure; and yet he had no Charms for my Landlady: For as that good
Woman did not resemble Venus at all in her Person, so neither did she in her
Taste. Happy had it been for Nanny the Chambermaid, if she had seen with the
Eyes of her Mistress; for that poor Girl fell so violently in love with Jones
in five Minutes, that her Passion afterward cost her many a Sigh. This Nancy
was extremely pretty, and altogether as coy; for she had refused a Drawer, and
one or two young Farmers in the Neighborhood, but the bright Eyes of our Hero
thawed all her Ice in a Moment.

When Jones returned to the Kitchen, his Cloth was not yet laid; nor indeed was
there any Occasion it should, his Dinner remaining in Satu quo, as did the Fire
which was to dress it. This Disappointment might have put many a philosopical
Temper into a Passion; but it had no such Effect on Jones. He only gave the
Landlady a gentle Rebuke, saying, 'Since it was so difficult to get it heated,
he would eat the Beef cold.' But now the good Woman, whether moved by
Compassion, or by Shame, or by whatever other Motive, I cannot tell, first gave
her Servants a round Scold for disobeying the Orders which she had never given,
and then bidding the Drawer lay a Napkin in the Sun, she set about the Matter
in good earnest, and soon accomplished it.

This Sun, into which Jones was now conducted, was truly named as Lucus a non
lucendo; for it was an Apartment into which the Sun had scarce ever looked. It
was indeed the worst Room in the House; and happy was it for Jones that it was
so. However, he was now too hungry to find any Fault; but having once satisfied
his Appetite, he ordered the Drawer to carry a Bottle of Wine into a better
Room, and expressed some Resentment at having been shown into a Dungeon.

The Drawer having obeyed his Commands, he was, after some Time, attended by
the Barber; who would not indeed have suffered him to wait so long for his
Company, had he not been listening in the Kitchen to the Landlady, who was
entertaining a Circle that she had gathered round her with the History of poor
Jones, Part of which she had extracted from his own Lips, and the other Part
was her own ingenious Composition; 'for she said he was a poor Parish Boy,
taken into the House of Squire Allworthy, where he was bred up as an
Apprentice, and now turned out of Doors for his Misdeeds, particularly for
making Love to his young Mistress, and probably for robbing the House; for how
else should he come by the little Money he has. And this,' says she, 'is your
Gentleman, forsooth.' 'A Servant of Squire Allworthy!' says the Barber, 'what's
his Name.' -- 'Why he told me his Name was Jones,' says she, 'perhaps he goes
by a wrong Name. Nay, and he told me too, that the Squire had maintained him as
his own Son, thof he had quarrelled with him now.' 'And if his Name be Jones,
he told you the Truth,' said the Barber; for I have Relations who live in that
Country, nay, and some People say he is his Son. 'Why does he not go by the
Name of his Father?' 'I cannot tell that,' said the Barber, 'many People's Sons
don't go by the Name of their Father.' 'Nay,' said the Landlady, 'if I thought
he was a Gentleman's Son, thof he was a Bye Blow, I should behave to him in
another guess Manner; for many of these Bye Blows come to be great Men; and, as
my poor first Husband used to say, Never affront any Customer that is a
Gentleman.'

CHAP. V. A Dialogue between Mr. Jones and the Barber.
THIS Conversation passed partly while Jones was at Dinner in his Dungeon, and
partly while he was expecting the Barber in the Parlour. And, as soon as it was
ended, Mr. Benjamin, as we have said, attended him, and was very kindly desired
to sit down. Jones then filling out a Glass of Wine, drank his Health by the
Appellation of Doctissime Tonsorum. Ago tibi Gratias, Domine, said the Barber,
and then looking very steadfastly at Jones, he said, with great Gravity, and
with a seeming Surprise, as if he recollected a Face he had seen before, 'Sir,
may I crave the Favor to know if your Name is not Jones?' To which the other
answered, That it was. 'Proh Deum atque Hominum Fidem,' says the Barber, 'how
strangely Things come to pass. Mr. Jones, I am your most obedient Servant, I
find you do not know me, which indeed is no Wonder, since you never saw me but
once, and then you was very young. Pray, Sir, how does the good Squire
Allworthy? How does Ille optimus omnium Patronus?' 'I find,' said Jones, 'you
do indeed know me; but I have not the like Happiness of recollecting you.' -- I
do not wonder at that,' cries Benjamin; 'but I am surprised I did not know you
sooner, for you are not in the least altered. And pray, Sir, may I without
Offense enquire whither you are traveling this Way? Fill the Glass, Mr.
Barber,' said Jones, 'and ask me no more Questions.' Nay, Sir,' answered
Benjamin, 'I would not be troublesome; and I hope you don't think me a Man of
an impertinent Curiosity, for that is a Vice which nobody can lay to my Charge;
but I ask Pardon, for when a Gentleman of your Figure travels without his
Servants, we may suppose him to be, as we say, in Casu incognito, and perhaps I
ought not to have mentioned your Name.' 'I own,' says Jones, 'I did not expect
to have been so well known in this Country as I find I am, yet, for particular
Reasons, I shall be obliged to you if you will not mention my Name to any other
Person, till I am gone from hence.' 'Pauca Verba,' answered the Barber; 'and I
wish no other here knew you but myself; for some People have Tongues; but I
promise you I can keep a Secret. My Enemies will allow me that Virtue.' 'And
yet that is not the Characteristic of your Profession, Mr. Barber,' answered
Jones. 'Alas, Sir,' replied Benjamin, 'Non si male nunc and olim sic erat. I
was not born nor bred a Barber, I assure you. I have spent most of my Time
among Gentlemen, and though I say it, I understand something of Gentility. And if
you had thought me as worthy of your Confidence as you have some other People,
I should have shown you I could have kept a Secret better. I should not have
degraded your Name in a public Kitchen; for indeed, Sir, some People have not
used you well; for besides making a public Proclamation of what you told them
of a Quarrel between yourself and Squire Allworthy, they added Lies of their
own, Things which I knew to be Lies. You surprise me greatly,' cries Jones.'
'Upon my Word, Sir, answered Benjamin, 'I tell the Truth, and I need not tell
you my Landlady was the Person. I am sure it moved me to hear the Story, and I
hope it is all false; for I have a great Respect for you, I do assure you I
have, and have had, ever since the Goodnature you showed to Black George,
which was talked of all over the Country, and I received more than one Letter
about it. Indeed it made you beloved by every body. You will pardon me,
therefore; for it was real Concern at what I heard made me ask any Questions;
for I have no impertinent Curiosity about me; but I love Goodnature, and
thence became Amoris abundantia ergo Te.'

Every Profession of Friendship easily gains Credit with the Miserable, it is
no wonder, therefore, if Jones, who, besides his being miserable, was extremely
open-hearted, very readily believed all the Professions of Benjamin, and
received him into his Bosom. The Scraps of Latin, some of which Benjamin
applied properly enough, though it did not favor of profound Literature,
seemed yet to indicate something superior to a common Barber, and so indeed did
his whole Behavior. Jones therefore believed the Truth of what he said, as to
his Original and Education, and at length, after much Entreaty, he said, 'Since
you have heard, my Friend, so much of my Affairs, and seem so desirous to know
the Truth, if you will have Patience to hear it, I will inform you of the
whole.' 'Patience,' cries Benjamin, 'that I will, if the Chapter was never so
long, and I am very much obliged to you for the Honor you do me.'

Jones now began, and related the whole History, forgetting only a Circumstance
or two, namely, every thing which passed on that Day in which he had fought
with Thwackum, and ended with his Resolution to go to Sea, till the Rebellion
in the North had made him change his Purpose, and had brought him to the Place
where he then was.

Little Benjamin, who had been all Attention, never once interrupted the
Narrative; but when it was ended, he could not help observing, that there must
be surely something more invented by his Enemies, and told Mr. Allworthy
against him, or so good a Man would never have dismissed one he had loved so
tenderly, in such a Manner. To which Jones answered, 'He doubted not but such
villainous Arts had been made use of to destroy him.'

And surely it was scarce possible for any one to have avoided making the same
Remark with the Barber; who had not, indeed, heard from Jones one single
Circumstance upon which he was condemned; for his Actions were not now placed
in those injurious Lights, in which they had been misrepresented to Allworthy:
Nor could he mention those many false Accusations which had been from time to
time preferred against him to Allworthy; for with none of these was he himself
acquainted. He had likewise, as we have observed, omitted many material Facts
in his present Relation. Upon the whole, indeed, every thing now appeared in
such favorable Colors to Jones, that Malice it self would have found it no
easy Matter to fix any Blame upon him.

Not that Jones desired to conceal or to disguise the Truth; nay, he would have
been more unwilling to have suffered any Censure to fall on Mr. Allworthy for
punishing him, than on his own Actions for deserving it; but, in Reality, so it
happened, and so it always will happen: For let a Man be never so honest, the
Account of his own Conduct will, in Spite of himself, be so very favorable,
that his Vices will come purified through his Lips, and, like foul Liquors well
strained, will leave all their Foulness behind. For though the Facts themselves
may appear, yet so different will be the Motives, Circumstances, and
Consequences, when a Man tells his own Story, and when his Enemy tells it, that
we scarce can recognize the Facts to be one and the same.

Though the Barber had drank down this Story with greedy Ears, he was not yet
satisfied. There was a Circumstance behind, which his Curiosity, cold as it
was, most eagerly longed for. Jones had mentioned the Fact of his Amor, and of
his being the Rival of Blifil, but had cautiously concealed the Name of the
young Lady. The Barber therefore, after some Hesitation, and many Hums and
Has, at last begged Leave to crave the Name of the Lady, who appeared to be
the principal Cause of all this Mischief. Jones paused a Moment, and then said,
'Since I have trusted you with so much, and since I am afraid, her Name is
become too public already on this Occasion, I will not conceal it from you. Her
Name is Sophia Western.'

'Proh Deum atque Hominum Fidem! Squire Western has a Daughter grown a Woman!'
'Ay, and such a Woman,' cries Jones, 'that the World cannot match. No Eye ever
saw any thing so beautiful; but that is her least Excellence. Such Sense, such
Goodness! O I could praise her for ever, and yet should omit half her Virtues.'
'Mr. Western a Daughter grown up!' cries the Barber, 'I remember the Father a
Boy; well, Tempus edax Rerum.'

The Wine being now at an End, the Barber pressed very eagerly to be his
Bottle; but Jones absolutely refused, saying, 'He had already drank more than
he ought; and that he now chose to retire to his Room, where he wished he could
procure himself a Book.' 'A Book!' cries Benjamin, 'what Book would you have?
Latin or English? I have some curious Books in both Languages. Such as Erasmi
Colloquia, Ovid de Tristibus, Gradus ad Parnassum; and in English, I have
several of the best Books, though some of them are a little torn; but I have a
great Part of Stow's Chronicle; the sixth Volume of Pope's Homer; the third
Volume of the Spectator; the second Volume of Echard's Roman History; the
Craftsman; Robinson Crusoe; Thomas a Kempis, and two Volumes of Tom Brown's
Works.'

'Those last,' cries Jones, 'are Books I never saw, so if you please to lend me
one of those Volumes.' The Barber assured him he would be highly entertained;
for he looked upon the Author to have been one of the greatest Wits that ever
the Nation produced. He then stepped to his House, which was hard by, and
immediately returned, after which, the Barber having received very strict
Injunctions of Secrecy from Jones, and having sworn inviolably to maintain it,
they separated; the Barber went home, and Jones retired to his Chamber.

CHAP. VI. In which more of the Talents of Mr. Benjamin will appear, as well as
who this extraordinary Person was.
IN the Morning Jones grew a little uneasy at the Desertion of his Surgeon, as
he apprehended some Inconvenience, or even Danger, might attend the not
Dressing his Wound; he enquired therefore of the Drawer what other Surgeons
were to be met with in that Neighborhood. The Drawer told him there was one
not far off; but he had known him often refuse to be concerned after another
had been sent for before him; 'but, Sir,' says he, 'if you will take my Advice,
there is not a Man in the Kingdom can do your Business better than the Barber
who was with you last Night. We look upon him to be one of the ablest Men at a
Cut in all this Neighborhood. For though he has not been here above three
Months, he has done several great Cures.'

The Drawer was presently dispatched for little Benjamin, who being acquainted
in what Capacity he was wanted, prepared himself accordingly, and attended; but
with so different an Air and Aspect from that which he wore when his Basin was
under his Arm, that he could scarce be known to be the same Person.

'So, Tonsor,' says Jones, 'I find you have more Trades than one; how came you
not to inform me of this last Night? A Surgeon,' answered Benjamin, with great
Gravity, 'is a Profession, not a Trade. The Reason why I did not acquaint you
last Night that I professed this Art, was that I then concluded you was under
the Hands of another Gentleman, and I never love to interfere with my Brethren
in their Business. Ars omnibus communis; but now, Sir, if you please, I will
inspect your Head, and when I see into your Skull, I will give my Opinion of
your Case.'

Jones had no great Faith in this new Professor; however he suffered him to
open the Bandage, and to look at his Wound, which as soon as he had done,
Benjamin began to groan and shake his Head violently. Upon which Jones, in a
peevish Manner, bid him not play the Fool, but tell him in what Condition he
found him. 'Shall I answer you as a Surgeon, or a Friend?' said Benjamin. 'As a
Friend, and seriously,' said Jones. 'Why then, upon my Soul,' cries Benjamin,
'it would require a great deal of Art to keep you from being well after a very
few Dressings; and if you will suffer me to apply some Salve of mine, I will
answer for the Success.' Jones gave his Consent, and the Plaster was applied
accordingly.

'There, Sir,' cries Benjamin, 'now I will, if you please, resume my former
Self; but a Man is obliged to keep up some Dignity in his Countenance whilst he
is performing these Operations, or the World will not submit to be handled by
him. You cannot imagine, Sir, of how much Consequence a grave Aspect is to a
grave Character. A Barber may make you laugh, but a Surgeon ought rather to
make you cry.'

'Mr. Barber, or Mr. Surgeon, or Mr. Barber-Surgeon, said Jones.' -- 'O dear
Sir,' answered Benjamin, interrupting him, 'Infandum Regina jubes renovare
Dolorem. You recall to my Mind that cruel Separation of the united Fraternities,
so much to the Prejudice of both Bodies, as all Separations must be, according
to the old Adage, Vis unita fortior; which to be sure there are not wanting
some of one or of the other Fraternity who are able to construe. What a Blow
was this to me who unite both in my own Person.' -- Well, by whatever Name you
please to be called,' continued Jones, 'you certainly are one of the oddest,
most comical Fellows I ever met with, and must have something very surprising
in your Story, which you must confess I have a Right to hear.' 'I do confess
it,' answered Benjamin, 'and will very readily acquaint you with it, when you
have sufficient Leisure; for I promise you it will require a good deal of
Time.' Jones told him he could never be more at Leisure than at present. 'Well
then,' said Benjamin, 'I will obey you; but first I will fasten the Door, that
none may interrupt us.' He did so, and then advancing with a solemn Air to
Jones, said; 'I must begin by telling you, Sir, that you yourself have been the
greatest Enemy I ever had.' Jones was a little startled at this sudden
Declaration. 'I your Enemy, Sir!' says he, with much Amazement, and some
Sternness in his Look. 'Nay, be not angry,' said Benjamin, 'for I promise you I
am not. You are perfectly innocent of having intended me any Wrong; for you was
then an Infant; but I shall, I believe, unriddle all this the Moment I mention
my Name. Did you never hear, Sir, of one Partridge, who had the Honor of being
reputed your Father, and the Misfortune of being ruined by that Honor?' 'I
have indeed heard of that Partridge,' says Jones, 'and have always believed
myself to be his Son.' 'Well, Sir,' answered Benjamin, 'I am that Partridge;
but I hear absolve you from all filial Duty; for I do assure you you are no Son
of mine.' 'How,' replied Jones, 'and is it possible that a false Suspicion
should have drawn all the ill Consequences upon you, with which I am too well
acquainted?' 'It is possible,' cries Benjamin, 'for it is so; but though it is
natural enough for Men to hate even the innocent Causes of their Sufferings,
yet I am of a different Temper. I have loved you ever since I heard of your
Behavior to Black George, as I told you; and am convinced from this
extraordinary Meeting, that you are born to make me Amends for all I have
suffered on that Account. Besides, I dreamt, the Night before I saw you, that I
stumbled over a Stool without hurting myself; which plainly showed me something
good was toward me; and last Night I dreamt again, that I rode behind you on a
Milk white Mare, which is a very excellent Dream, and betokens much good
Fortune, which I am resolved to pursue, unless you have the Cruelty to deny me.'

'I should be very glad, Mr. Partridge,' answered 'Jones, 'to have it in my
Power to make you Amends for your Sufferings on my Account; though at present I
see no Likelihood of it; however, I assure you I will deny you nothing which is
in my Power to grant.'

'It is in your Power sure enough,' replied Benjamin, 'for I desire nothing
more than Leave to attend you in this Expedition. Nay, I have so entirely set
my Heart upon it, that if you should refuse me, you will kill both a Barber and
a Surgeon in one Breath.'

Jones answered smiling, That he should be very sorry to be the Occasion of so
much Mischief to the Public. He then advanced many prudential Reasons, in order
to dissuade Benjamin (whom we shall hereafter call Partridge) from his Purpose;
but all were in vain. Partridge relied strongly on his Dream of the milk-white
Mare. 'Besides, Sir, says he, I promise you, I have as good an Inclination to
the Cause, as any Man can possibly have; and go I will, whether you admit me to
go in your Company or not.'

Jones, who was as much pleased with Partridge, as Partridge could be with him,
and who had not consulted his own Inclination, but the Good of the other in
desiring him to stay behind; when he found his Friend so resolute, at last gave
his Consent; but then recollecting himself, he said, 'Perhaps,' Mr. Partridge,
you think I shall be able to support you, but I really am not;' and then taking
out his Purse, he told out nine Guineas, which he declared were his whole
Fortune.

Partridge answered, 'that his Dependence was only on his future Favor: For he
was thoroughly convinced he would shortly have enough in his Power. At present,
Sir, said he, I believe I am rather the richer Man of the two; but all I have
is at your Service, and at your Disposal. I insist upon your taking the whole,
and I beg only to attend you in the Quality of your Servant, Nil desperandum
est Teucro duce et auspice Teucro;' But to this generous Proposal concerning
the Money, Jones would by no means submit.

It was resolved to set out the next Morning; when a Difficulty arose
concerning the Baggage, for the Portmanteau of Mr. Jones was too large to be
carried without a Horse.

'If I may presume to give my Advice,' says Partridge, 'this Portmanteau, with
every Thing in it, except a few Shirts, should be left behind. Those I shall be
easily able to carry for you, and the res^ of your Clothes will remain very
safely locked up' in my House.

This Method was no sooner proposed than agreed to, and then the Barber
departed, in order to prepare^ every Thing for his intended Expedition.

CHAP. VII. Containing better Reasons than any which have yet appeared for the
Conduct of Partridge; an Apology for the Weakness of Jones; and some farther
Anecdotes concerning my Landlady.
THOUGH Partridge was one of the most superstitious of Men, he would hardly,
perhaps have desired to accompany Jones on his Expedition ^erely from the Omens
of the Joint-stool, and white ^^are, if his Prospect had been no better than to
have ^ared the Plunder gained in the Field of Battle. In ^^ct, when Partridge
came to ruminate on the Re^^ion he had heard from Jones, he could not recon^^e
to himself, that Mr. Allworthy should turn his ^^n (for so he most firmly
believed him to be) out of ^oors, for any Reason which he had heard assigned.
^e concluded therefore, that the whole was a Ficti^^, and that Jones, of whom
he had often from his ^orrespondents heard the wildest Character, had in ^ality
run away from his Father. It came into his ^ead, therefore, that if he could
prevail with the ^ung Gentleman to return back to his Father, he ^ould by that
Means render a Service to Allworthy, which would obliterate all his former
Anger; nay, ^^deed he conceived that very Anger was counterfeit^^, and that
Allworthy had sacrificed him to his own ^eputation. And this Suspicion, indeed,
he well ac^^unted for, from the tender Behavior of that ex^^llent Man to the
Foundling Child; from his great verity to Partridge, who knowing himself to be
in^cent, could not conceive that any other should ^^nk him guilty; lastly, from
the Allowance which had privately received long after the Annuity had ^^en
publicly taken from; and which he looked upon a kind of Smart-money, or rather
by way of ^tonement for Injustice: For it is very uncommon, believe, for Men to
ascribe the Benefactions they ^^ceive to pure Charity, when they can possibly
im^^te them to any other Motive. If he could by any ^eans, therefore, persuade
the young Gentleman to ^^turn home, he doubted not but that he should again
received into the Favor of Allworthy, and well warded for his Pains; nay, and
should be again re^red to his native Country; a Restoration which Ulysses
himself never wished more heartily than poor Partridge.

As for Jones, he was well satisfied with the Truth of what the other had
asserted, and believed that Partridge had no other Inducements but Love to him,
and Zeal for the Cause. A blameable Want of Caution, and Diffidence in the
Veracity of others, in which he was highly worthy of Censure. To say the Truth,
there are but two Ways by which Men become possessed of this excellent Quality.
The one is from long Experience, and the other is from Nature; which last, I
presume, is often meant by Genius, or great natural Parts; and it is infinitely
the better of the two, not only as we are Masters of i^ much earlier in Life,
but as it is much more infallible and conclusive: For a Man who has been
imposed on by ever so many, may still hope to find others more honest; whereas
he who receives certain necessary Admonitions from within, that this is
impossible, must have very little Understanding indeed, if he ever renders
himself liable to be once deceived. As Jones had not this Gift from Nature, he
was too young to have gained it by Experience; for at the diffident Wisdom
which is to be acquired this Way, we seldom arrive till very late in Life;
which is perhaps the Reason why some old Men are apt to despise the
Understandings of all those who are a little younger than themselves.

Jones spent most Part of the Day in the Company of a new Acquaintance. This
was no other than the Landlord of the House, or rather the Husband of the
Landlady. He had but lately made his Descent down Stairs, after a long Fit of
the Gout, in which Distemper he was generally confined to his Room during one
half of the Year; and during the rest, he walked about the House, smoaked his
Pipe, and drank his Bottle with his Friends, without concerning himself in the
least with any Kind of Business. He had ^^en bred, as they call it, a
Gentleman, that is, bred ^^ to do nothing, and had spent a very small For^ne,
which he inherited from an industrious Farmer ^^ Uncle, in Hunting,
Horse-racing, and Cock^ghting, and had been married by my Landlady for ^^tain
Purposes which he had long desisted from an^^ering: for which she hated him
heartily. But as ^^ was a surly Kind of Fellow, so she contented her^^^f with
frequently upbraiding him by disadvantage^s Comparisons with her first Husband,
whose Praise ^e had eternally in her Mouth; and as she was for ^e most part
Mistress of the Profit, so she was sa^^^fied to take upon herself the Care and
Government ^^ the Family, and after a long successless Struggle, ^^ suffer her
Husband to be Master of himself.

In the Evening when Jones retired to his Room, a ^^all Dispute arose between
this fond Couple concern^^g him. 'What,' says the Wife, 'you have been ^tipling
with the Gentleman! I see.' 'Yes,' an^wered the Husband, 'we have cracked a
Bottle together, and a very Gentleman-like Man he is, and has a very pretty
Notion of Horseflesh. Indeed ^he is young, and has not seen much of the
World: For I believe he has been at very few Horse-races.' O ho! he is one of
your Order, is he?' replies the ^ndlady, 'he must be a Gentleman to be sure, if
he is a Horse-racer. The Devil fetch such Gentry, I am sure I wish I had never
seen any of them. I have Reason to love Horse-racers truly.' 'That you have,
says the Husband; for I was one you know.' 'Yes, answered she, 'You are a pure
one indeed. As my first Husband used to say, I may put all the Good I have ever
got by you in my Eyes, and see never the worse.' 'D -- n your first Husband,'
cries he,' -- 'Don't d -- n a better Man than yourself,' answered the Wife, 'if
he had been alive, you durst not have done it.' 'Then you think,' says he, 'I
have not so much Courage as yourself: For you have d -- n'd him often in my
Hearing. 'If I did,' says she, 'I have repented of it many's the good Time and
often. And if he was so good to forgive me a Word spoken in Haste, or so, it does
not become such a one as you to twitter me. He was a Husband to me, he was; and
if ever I did make use of an ill Word or so in a Passion; I never called him a
Rascal, I should have told a Lie, if I had called him a Rascal.' Much more she
said, but not in his Hearing: For having lighted his Pipe, he staggered off as
fast as he could. We shall therefore transcribe no more of her Speech, as it
approached still nearer and nearer to a Subject too indelicate to find any
Place in this History.

Early in the Morning, Partridge appeared at the Bedside of Jones, ready
equipped for the Journey, with his Knapsack at his Back. This was his own
Workmanship; for besides his other Trades, he was no indifferent Tailor. He had
already put up his whole Stock of Linen in it, consisting of four Shirts, to
which he now added eight for Mr. Jones, and then packing up the Portmanteau, he
was departing with it toward his own House, but was stopped in his Way by the
Landlady, who refused to suffer any Removals till after the Payment of the
reckoning.

The Landlady was, as we have said, absolute Governess in these Regions; it was
therefore necessary to comply with her Rules, so the Bill was presently writ
out, which amounted to a much large^ Sum than might have been expected, from
the Entertainment which Jones had met with; but here we are obliged to disclose
some Maxims, which Publicans hold to be the grand Mysteries of their Trade. The
first is, if they have any Thing good in their House (which indeed very seldom
happens) to produce i^ only to Persons who travel with great Equipages 2dly, To
charge the same for the very worst Provisions, as if they were the best. And,
lastly, if any of their Guests call but for little, to make them pay a double
Price for every Thing they have; so that the Amount by the Head may be much the
same.

The Bill being made and discharged, Jones set forward with Partridge carrying
his Knapsack; nor did the Landlady condescend to wish him a good Journey: for
this was, it seems, an Inn frequented by People of Fashion; and I know not
whence it is, but all those who get their Livelihood by People of Fashion,
contract as much Insolence to the rest of Mankind, as if they really belonged
to that Rank themselves.

CHAP. VIII. Jones arrives at Gloucester, and goes to the Bell; the Character
of that House, and of a Petty-fogger, which he there meets with.
MR. Jones, and Partridge, or Little Benjamin, (which Epithet of Little was
perhaps given him ironically, he being in reality near six Feet high) having
left their last Quarters in the Manner before described, traveled on to
Gloucester without meeting any Adventure worth relating.

Being arrived here, they chose for their House of Entertainment the Sign of
the Bell, an excellent House indeed, and which I do most seriously recommend to
every Reader who shall visit this ancient City. The Master of it is Brother to
the great Preacher Whitefield; but is absolutely untainted with the per^icious
Principles of Methodism, or of any other heretical Sect. He is indeed a very
honest plain Man, and in my Opinion, not likely to create any Disturbance
either in Church or State. His Wife has I believe, had much Pretension to
Beauty, and is still a very fine Woman. Her Person and Deportment might have
made a shining Figure in the politest Assemblies; but though she must be
conscious of this, and many other Perfections, she seems perfectly contented
with, and resigned to that State of Life to which she is called; and this
Resignation is entirely owing to the Prudence and Wisdom of her Temper: For she
is at present as free from any methodistical Notions as her Husband. I say at
present: For she freely confesses that her Brother's Documents made at first
some Impression upon her, and that she had put herself to the Expense of a long
Hood, in order to attend the extraordinary Emotions of the Spirit; but having
found during an Experiment of three Weeks, no Emotions, she says, worth a
Farthing, she very wisely laid by her Hood, and abandoned the Sect. To be
concise, she is a very friendly, good-natured Woman, and so industrious to
oblige, that the Guests must be of a very morose Disposition who are not
extremely well satisfied in her House.

Mrs. Whitefield happened to be in the Yard when Jones and his Attendant
marched in. Her Sagacity soon discovered in the Air of our Hero something which
distinguished him from the Vulgar. She ordered her Servants, therefore,
immediately to show him into a Room, and presently afterward invited him to
Dinner with herself; which Invitation he very thankfully accepted: For indeed
much less agreeable Company than that of Mrs. Whitefield, and a^ much worse
Entertainment than she had provided would have been welcome, after so long
fasting and so long a Walk.

Besides Mr. Jones and the good Governess of the Mansion, there sat down at
Table an Attorney o^ Salisbury, indeed the very same who had brought the News
of Mrs. Blifil's Death to Mr. Allworthy, an^ whose Name, which, I think, we did
not before mention, was Dowling; there was likewise present another Person, who
styled himself a Lawyer, an^ who lived somewhere near Lidlinch in
Somersetshire. This Fellow, I say, styled himself a Lawyer, but was indeed a
most vile Petty-fogger, without Sense or Knowledge of any Kind; one of those
who may be termed Train-bearers to the Law; a Sort of Supernumeraries in the
Profession, who are the Hackneys of Attorneys, and will ride more Miles for
half a Crown, than a Post-boy.

During the time of Dinner, the Somersetshire Lawyer recollected the Face of
Jones, which he had seen at Mr Allworthy's: For he had often visited in that
Gentleman's Kitchen. He therefore took Occasion to enquire after the good
Family there, with that Familiarity which would have become an intimate Friend
or Acquaintance of Mr. Allworthy; and indeed he did all in his Power to
insinuate himself to be such, though he had never had the Honor of speaking to
any Person in that Family higher than the Butler. Jones answered all his
Questions with much Civility, though he never remembered to have seen the
Pettyfogger before, and though he concluded from the outward Appearance and
Behavior of the Man, that he usurped a Freedom with his Betters, to which he
was by no means entitled.

As the Conversation of Fellows of this Kind, is of all others the most
detestable to Men of any Sense, the Cloth was no sooner removed than Mr. Jones
withdrew, and a little barbarously left poor Mrs. Whitefield to do a Penance,
which I have often heard Mr. Timothy Harris, and other Publicans of good Taste,
lament, as the severest Lot annexed to their Calling, namely, that of being
obliged to keep Company with their Guests.

Jones had no sooner quitted the Room, than the Petty-fogger, in a whispering
Tone, asked Mrs. Whitefield, 'if she knew who that fine Spark was?' She
answered, 'she had never seen the Gentleman before. The Gentleman, indeed!'
replied the Petty-fogger, 'a pretty Gentleman truly! Why, he is the Bastard of a
Fellow who was hanged for Horse-stealing. He was dropped at Squire Allworthy's
Door, where one of the Servants found him in a Box so full of Rainwater, that
he would certainly have been drowned, had he not been reserved for another
Fate.' Ay, ay, you need not mention it, I protest, we understand what that Fate
is very well,' cried Dowling, with a most facetious Grin. 'Well,' continued the
other, 'the Squire ordered him to be taken in: For he is a timbersome Man every
Body knows, and was afraid of drawing himself into a Scrape, and there the
Bastard was bred up, and fed and cloathified all to the World like any
Gentleman: and there he got one of the Servant Maids with Child, and persuaded
her to swear it to the Squire himself; and afterward he broke the Arm of one
Mr. Thwackum a Clergyman, only because he reprimanded him for following Whores;
and afterward he snapt a Pistol at Mr. Blifil behind his Back; and once when
Squire Allworthy was sick, he got a Drum, and beat it all over the House, to
prevent him from sleeping: And twenty other Pranks he has played, for all
which, about four or five Days ago, just before I left the Country, the Squire
stripped him stark naked, and turned him out of Doors.

'And very justly too, I protest,' cries Dowling, 'I would turn my own Son out
of Doors, if he was guilty of half as much. And pray what is the' Name of this
pretty Gentleman?

'The Name o'un!' answered Petty-fogger, 'why, he is a called Thomas Jones.'

Jones!' answered Dowling, a little eagerly, 'what, Mr. Jones, that lived at
Mr. Allworthy's! was that the Gentleman that dined with us?' 'The very same,'
said the other. 'I have heard of the Gentleman,' cries Dowling, 'often, but I
never heard any ill Character of him.' 'And I am sure,' says Mrs. Whitefield,
'if half what this Gentleman has said be true, Mr. Jones has the most
deceitful Countenance I ever saw; for sure his Looks promise something very
different; and I must say, for the little I have seen of him, he is as civil a
well-bred Man as you would wish to converse with.'

Pettyfogger calling to mind that he had not been sworn, as he usually was,
before he gave his Evidence, now bound what he had declared with so many Oaths
and Imprecations, that the Lady's Ears were shocked, and she put a Stop to his
swearing, by assuring him of her Belief. Upon which he said, 'I hope, Madam,
you imagine I would scorn to tell such Things of any Man, unless I knew them to
be true. What Interest have I in taking away the Reptutation of a Man who never
injured me? I promise you every Syllable of what I have said is Fact, and the
whole Country knows it.'

As Mrs. Whitefield had no Reason to suspect that the Pettyfogger had any
Motive or Temptation to abuse Jones, the Reader cannot blame her for believing
what he so confidently affirmed with many Oaths. She accordingly gave up her
Skill in Physiognomy, and henceforwards conceived so ill an Opinion of her
Guest, that she heartily wished him out of her House.

This Dislike was now farther increased by a Report which Mr. Whitefield made
from the Kitchen, where Partridge had informed the Company, 'That though he
carried the Knapsack, and contented himself with staying among Servants, while
Tom Jones (as he called him) was regaling in the Parlour, he was not his
Servant, but only a Friend and Companion, and as good a Gentleman as Mr. Jones
himself.'

Dowling sat all this while silent, biting his Fingers, making Faces, grinning,
and looking wonderfully arch; at last he opened his Lips, and protested that
the Gentleman looked like another Sort of Man. He then called for his Bill with
the utmost Haste, declared he must be at Hertford that Evening, lamenting his
great Hurry of Business, and wished he could divide himself into twenty Pieces,
in order to be at once in twenty Places.

The Pettyfoggar now likewise departed, and then Jones desired the Favor of
Mrs. Whitefield's Company to drink Tea with him; but she refused, and with a
Manner so different from that with which she had received him at Dinner, that
it a little surprised him. And now he perceived her Behavior totally changed;
for instead of that natural Affability which we have before celebrated, she
wore a constrained Severity on her Countenance, which was so disagreeable to
Mr. Jones, that he resolved, however late, to quit the House that Evening.

He did indeed account somewhat unfairly for this sudden Change; for besides
some hard and unjust Surmises concerning Female Fickleness and Mutability, he
began to suspect that he owed this want of Civility to his Want of Horses, a
Sort of Animals which, as they dirty no Sheets, are thought in Inns, to pay
better for their Beds than their Riders, and are therefore considered as the
more desirable Company; but Mrs. Whitefield, to do her Justice, had a much more
liberal Way of thinking. She was perfectly wellbred, and could be very civil to
a Gentleman, though he walked on Foot: In Reality, she looked on our Hero as a
sorry Scoundrel, and therefore treated him as such, for which not even Jones
himself, had he known as much as the Reader, could have blamed her; nay, on the
Contrary, he must have approved her Conduct, and have esteemed her the more for
the Disrespect shown toward himself. This is indeed a most aggravating
Circumstance which attends unjustly depriving Men of their Reputation; for a
Man who is Conscious of having an ill Character, cannot justly be angry with
those who neglect and slight him; but ought rather to despise those that affect
his Conversation, unless where a perfect Intimacy must have convinced them that
their Friend's Character has been falsely and injuriously aspersed.

This was not, however, the Case of Jones; for as he was a perfect Stranger to
the Truth, so he was with good Reason offended at the Treatment he received. He
therefore paid his Reckoning and departed, highly against the Will of Mr.
Partridge, who having remonstrated much against it to no Purpose, at last
condescended to take up his Knapsack, and to attend his Friend.

CHAP. IX. Containing several Dialogues between Jones and Partridge, concerning
Love, Cold, Hunger, and other Matters; with the lucky and narrow Escape of
Partridge, as he was on the very Brink of making a fatal Discovery to his
Friend.
THE Shadows began now to descend larger from the high Mountains: The feathered
Creation had betaken themselves to their Rest. Now the highest Order of Mortals
were sitting down to their Dinners, and the lowest Order to their Suppers. In a
Word, the Clock struck five just as Mr. Jones took his Leave of Gloucester; an
Hour at which (as it was now Midwinter) the dirty Fingers of Night would have
drawn her sable Curtain over the Universe, had not the Moon forbid her, who now
with a Face as broad and as red as those of some jolly Mortals, who, like her,
turn Night into Day, began to rise from her Bed, where she had slumbered away
the Day, in order to sit up all Night. Jones had not traveled far before he
paid his Compliments to that beautiful Planet, and turning to his Companion,
asked him, If he had ever beheld so delicious an Evening. Partride making no
ready Answer to his Question, he proceeded to comment on the Beauty of the
Moon, and repeated some Passages from Milton, who has certainly excelled all
other Poets in his Description of the heavenly Luminaries. He then told
Partridge the Story from the Spectator, of two Lovers who had agreed to
entertain themselves when they were at a great Distance from each other, by
repairing, at a certain fixed Hour, to look at the Moon; thus pleasing
themselves with the Thought that they were both employed in contempiating the
same Object at the same Time. 'Those Lovers,' added he, 'must have had Souls
truly capable of feeling all the Tenderness of the sublimest of all human
Passions.' 'Very probably,' cries Partridge, 'but I envy them more if they had
Bodies incapable of feeling cold; for I am almost frozen to Death, and am very
much afraid I shall lose a Piece of my Nose before we get to another House of
Entertainment. Nay, truly, we may well expect some Judgment should happen to us
for our Folly in running away so by Night from one of the most excellent Inns I
ever set my Foot into. I am sure I never saw more good Things in my Life, and
the greatest Lord in the Land cannot live better in his own House than he may
there. And to forsake such a House, and go a rambling about the Country, the
Lord knows whither, per devia rura viarum, I say nothing for my Part; but some
People might not have Charity enough to conclude we were in our sober Senses.'
'Fie upon it, Mr. Partridge,' says Jones, 'have a better Heart; consider you
are going to face an Enemy, and are you afraid of facing a little Cold? I wish
indeed we had a Guide to advise which of these Roads we should take.' 'May I be
so bold,' says Partridge, 'to offer my Advice; Interdum Stultus opportuna
loquitur.' 'Why, which of them.' cries Jones, 'would you recommend?' 'Truly
neither of them,' answered Partridge. 'The only Road we can be certain of
finding, is the Road we came. A good hearty Pace will bring us back to
Gloucester in an Hour; but if we go forward, the Lord Harry knows when we shall
arrive at any Place; for I see at least fifty Miles before me, and no House in
all the Way.' 'You see, indeed, a very fair Prospect,' says Jones, 'which
receives great additional Beauty from the extreme Luster of the Moon. However,
I will keep the Left Hand Track, as that seems to lead directly to those Hills,
which we were informed lie not far from Worcester. And here, if you incline to
quit me; you may, and return back again! but for my Part, I am resolved to go
forward.'

'It is unkind in you, Sir,' says Partridge, 'to suspect me of any such
Intention. What I have advised has been as much on your Account as on my own;
but since you are determined to go on, I am as much determined to follow.' I
prae, sequar te. They now traveled some Miles without speaking to each other,
during which Suspense of Discourse Jones often sighed, and Benjamin groaned as
bitterly, though from a very different Reason. At length Jones made a full Stop,
and turning about, cries, 'Who knows, Partridge, but the loveliest Creature in
the Universe may have her Eyes now fixed on that very Moon which I behold at
this Instant!' 'Very likely, Sir, answered Partridge, and if my Eyes were fixed
on a good Surloin of roast Beef, the Devil might take the Moon and her Horns
into the Bargain.' Did ever Tramontane make such an Answer,' cries Jones?
'Prithee, Partridge, wast thou never susceptible of Love in thy Life, or has
Time worn away all the Traces of it from thy Memory?' 'Alack-a-day,' cries
Partridge, well would it have been for me if I had never known what Love was.
Infandum Regina jubes renovare 'Dolorem. I am sure I have tasted all the
Tenderness and Sublimities and Bitternesses of the Pason.' 'Was your Mistress
unkind then?' says Jones. 'Very unkind indeed, Sir,' answered Partridge; 'for
she married me, and made one of the most confounded Wives in the World.
However, Heaven be praised, she is gone, and if I believed she was in the Moon,
according to a Book I once read, which teaches that to be the Receptacle of
departed Spirits, I would never look at it for fear of seeing her; but I wish,
Sir, that the Moon was a Looking-glass for your Sake, and that Miss Sophia
Western was now placed before it.' 'My dear Partridge,' cries Jones, 'what a
Thought was there! A thought which I am certain could never have entered into
any Mind but that of a Lover. O Partridge, could I hope once again to see that
Face; but, alas! all those golden Dreams are vanished for ever, and my only
Refuge from future Misery is to forget the Object of all my former Happiness.'
'And do you really despair of ever seeing Mifs Western again?' answered
Partridge; 'if you will follow my Advice I will engage you shall not only see
her, but have her in your Arms.' 'Ha! do not awaken a Though of that Nature,'
cries Jones. 'I have struggled sufficiently to conquer all such Wishes already.
'Nay, answered Partridge, 'if you do not wish to have your Mistress in your
Arms, you are a most extraordinary Lover indeed.' Well, well,' says Jones, 'let
us avoid this Subject; but pray what is your Advice?' 'To give it you in the
military Phrase then,' says Partridge,' as we are Soldiers, To the Right
about.' 'Let us return the Way we came, we may yet reach Gloucester to Night
though late; whereas if we proceed, we are likely, for ought I see, to ramble
about for ever with out coming either to House or Home.' I have already told
you my Resolution is to go on,' answered Jones; 'but I would have you go back.
I am obliged to you for your company hither, and I beg you to accept a Guinea
as a small Instance of my Gratitude. Nay, it would be cruel in me to suffer you
to go any farther; for to deal plainly with you, my chief End and Desire is a
glorious Death in the Service of my King and Country.' 'As for your Money,'
replied Partridge, 'I beg, Sir, you will put it up; I will receive none of you
at this Time; for at present I am, I believe, the richer Man of the two. And as
your Resolution is to go on, so mine is to follow you if you do. Nay, now my
presence appears absolutely necessary to take Care of you, since your
Intentions are so desperate, for I promise you my Views are much more prudent:
As you are resolved to fall in Battle, if you can, so I am resolved as firmly
to come to no Hurt if I can help it. And indeed I have the Comfort to think
there will be but little Danger; for a Popish Priest told me the other Day, the
Business would soon be over, and he believed without a Battle.' A popish
Priest,' cries Jones, 'I have heard, is not always to be believed when he
speaks in Behalf of his Religion.' 'Yes, but so far,' answered the other, 'from
speaking in Behalf of his Religion, he assured me, the Catholics did not
expect to be any Gainers by the Change; for that Prince Charles was as good a
Protestant as any in England; and that nothing but Regard to Right made him and
the rest of the popish Party to be Jacobites.' 'I believe him to be as much a
Protestant as I believe he has any Right,' says Jones, 'and I make no Doubt of
our Success, but not without a Battle. So that I am not so sanguine as your
Friend the popish Priest.' 'Nay, to be sure, Sir,' answered Parridge, 'all the
Prophecies I have ever read, speak of a great deal of Blood to be spilt in the
Quarrel, and the Miller with three Thumbs, who is now alive, is to hold the
Horses of three Kings, up to his Knees in Blood. Lord have Mercy upon us all,
and send better Times!' 'With what Stuff and Nonsense have thou filled thy
Head,' answered Jones? This too, I suppose, comes from the popish Priest.
Monsters and Prodigies are the proper Arguguments to support monstrous and
absurd Doctrines. The Cause of King George is the Cause of Liberty and true
Religion. In other Words, it is the Cause of common Sense, my Boy, and I
warrant you will succeed, though Briareus himself was to rise again with his
hundred Thumbs, and to turn Miller.' Partridge made no Reply to this. He was
indeed cast in the utmost Confusion by this Declaration of Jones. For to inform
the Reader of a Secret, which we had no Opportunity of revealing before,
Partridge was in Truth a Jacobite, and had concluded that Jones was of the same
Party, and was now proceeding to join the Rebels. An Opinion which was not
without Foundation. For the tall long-sided Dame, mentioned by Hudibras; that
many-eyed, many-tongued, many-mouthed, many-eared Monster of Virgil, had
related the Story of the Quarrel between Jones and the Officer, with her usual
Regard to Truth. She had indeed changed the Name of Sophia into that of the
Pretender, and had reported, that drinking his Health was the Cause for which
Jones was knocked down. This Partridge had heard, and most firmly believed.
It Is no Wonder, therefore, that he had thence entertained the abovementioned
Opinion of Jones; and which he had almost discovered to him before he found out
his own Mistake. And at this the Reader will be the less inclined to wonder, if
he pleases to recollect the doubtful Phrase in which Jones first communicated
his Resolution to Mr. Partridge; and, indeed, had the Words been less
ambiguous, Partridge might very well have construed them as he did; being
persuaded, as he was, that the whole Nation were of the same Inclination in
their Hearts: Nor did it stagger him that Jones had traveled in the Company of
Soldiers; for he had the same Opinion of the Army which he had of the rest of
People.

But however well affected he might be to James or Charles, he was still much
more attached to Little Benjamin than to either: for which Reason he no sooner
discovered the Principles of his Fellow-traveller, than he thought proper to
conceal, and outwardly to give up his own to the Man on whom he depended for
the making his Fortune, since he by no means believed the Affairs of Jones to
be so desperate as they really were with Mr. Allworthy; for as he had kept a
constant Correspondence with some of his Neighbors since he left that Country,
he had heard much, indeed more than was true, of the great Affection Mr.
Allworthy bore this young Man, who, as Partridge had been instructed, was to be
that Gentleman's Heir, and whom, as we have said, he did not in the least doubt
to be his Son.

He imagined, therefore, that whatever Quarrel was between them, it would be
certainly made up at the Return of Mr. Jones; an Event from which he promised
great Advantages, if he could take this Opportunity of ingratiating himself
with that young Gentleman; and if he could by any Means be instrumental in
procuring his Return, he doubted not, as we have before said, but it would as
highly advance him in the Favor of Mr. Allworthy.

We have already observed, that he was a very good-natured Fellow, and he has
himself declared the violent Attachment he had to the Person and Character of
Jones; but possibly the Views which I have just before mentioned, might
likewise have some little Share in prompting him to undertake this
Expepedition, at least in urging him to continue it, after he had discovered,
that his Master and himself, like some prudent Fathers and Sons, though they
traveled together in great Friendship, had embraced opposite Parties. I am led
into this Conjecture, by having remarked, that though Love, Friendship, Esteem,
and such like, have very powerful Operations in the human Mind; Interest,
however, is an Ingredient seldom omitted by wise Men, when they would work
others to their own Purposes. This is indeed a most excellent Medicine, and
like Ward's Pill, flies at once to the particular Part of the Body on which you
desire to operate, whether it be the Tongue, the Hand, or any other Member,
where it scarce ever fails of immediately producing the desired Effect.

CHAP. X. In which our Travelers meet with a very extraordinary Adventure.
JUST as Jones and his Friend came to the End of their Dialogue in the
preceding Chapter, they arrived at the Bottom of a very steep Hill. Here Jones
stopped short, and directing his Eyes upwards, stood for a while silent. At
length he called to his Companion, and said, 'Partridge, I wish I was at the
Top of this Hill; it must certainly afford a most charming Prospect, especially
by this Light: For the solemn Gloom which the Moon casts on all Objects, is
beyond Expression beautiful, especially to an Imagination which is desirous of
cultivating melancholy Ideas.' Very probably,' answered Partridge; 'but if the
Top of the Hill be properest to produce melancholy Thoughts, I suppose the
Bottom is the likeliest to produce merry ones, and these I take to be much the
better of the two. I protest you have made my Blood run cold with the very
mentioning the Top of that Mountain; which seems to me to be one of the highest
in the World. No, no, if we look for any thing, let it be for a Place under
Ground, to screen ourselves from the Frost. -- Do so, said Jones, let it be but
within Hearing of this Place, and I will hollow to you at my Return back.'
'Surely, Sir, you are not mad,' said Partridge. 'Indeed I am,' answered Jones,
'if ascending this Hill be Madness: But as you complain so much of the cold
already, I would have you stay below. I will certainly return to you within an
Hour.' Pardon me, Sir,' cries Partridge, I have determined to follow you
wherever you go.' Indeed he was now afraid to stay behind; for though he was
Coward enough in all Respects, yet his chief Fear was that of Ghosts, with
which the present Time of Night, and the Wildness of the Place, extremely well
suited.

At this Instant Partridge espied a glimmering Light through some Trees, which
seemed very near to them. He immediately cried out in a Rapture, 'Oh, Sir!
Heaven has at last heard my Prayers, and has brought us to a House; perhaps
it may be an Inn. Let me beseech you, Sir, if you have any Compassion either
for me or yourself, do not despise the the Goodness of Providence, but let us
go directly to yon Light. Whether it be a Publick-house or no, I am sure if
they be Christians that dwell there, they will not refuse a little House-room
to Persons in our miserable Condition.' Jones at length yielded to the earnest
Supplications of Partridge, and both together made directly toward the Place
whence the Light issued.

They soon arrived at the Door of this House or Cottage: For it might be called
either, without much Impropriety. Here Jones knocked several Times
with-receiving any Answer from within; at which Partridge, whose head was full
of nothing but of Ghosts, Devils, Witches, and such like, began to tremble,
crying 'Lord have Mercy upon us, sure the People must be all dead. I can see no
Light neither now, and yet I am certain I saw a Candle burning but a Moment
before -- Well! I have heard of such Things. -- What have thou heard of,' said
Jones. The People are either fast asleep, or probably as this is a lonely
Place, are afraid to open their Door.' He then began to vociferate pretty
loudly, and at last an old Woman opening an upper Casement, asked who they
were, and what they wanted? Jones answered, 'they were Travelers who had lost
their Way, and having seen a Light in the Window, had been led thither in Hopes
of finding some Fire to warm themselves.' Whoever, you are,' cries the Woman,
'you have no Business here; nor shall I open the Door to any body a this Time
of Night.' Partridge, whom the Sound of a human Voice had recovered from his
Fright, fell to the most earnest Supplications to be admitted for a few Minutes
to the Fire, saying, 'he was almost dead with the Cold,' to which Fear had
indeed contributed equally with the Frost. He assured her, that the Gentleman
who spoke to her, was one of the greatest Squires in the Country, and made use
of every Argument save one, which Jones afterward effectually added, and this
was the Promise of half a Crown. A Bribe too great to be resisted by such a
Person, especially as the genteel Appearance of Jones, which the Light of the
Moon plainly discovered to her, together with his affable Behavior, had
entirely subdued those Apprehensions of Thieves which she had at first
conceived. She agreed, therefore, at last to let them in, where Partridge, to
his infinite Joy, found a good Fire ready for his Reception.

The poor Fellow, however, had no sooner warmed himself, than those Thoughts
which were always uppermost in his Mind, began a little to disturb his Brain.
There was no Article of his Creed in which he had a stronger Faith, than he had
in Witchcraft, nor can the Reader conceive a Figure more adapted to inspire
this Idea, than the old Woman, who now stood before him. She answered exactly
to that Picture drawn by Otway, in his Orphan. Indeed if this Woman had lived
in the Reign of James the First, her Appearance alone would have hanged her,
almost without any Evidence.

Many Circumstances likewise conspired to confirm Partridge in his Opinion. Her
living, as he then imagined, by herself in so lonely a Place; and in a House,
the Outside of which seemed much too good for her; but where the Inside was
furnished in the most neat and elegant Manner. To say the Truth, Jones himself
was not a little surprised at what he saw: For, besides the extraordinary
Neatness of the Room, it was adorned with a great Number of Nicknacks, and
Curiosities, which might have engaged the Attention of a Virtuoso.

While Jones was admiring these Things, and Partridge sat trembling with the
firm Belief that he was in the House of a Witch, the old Woman said, 'I hope,
Gentlemen, you will make what Haste you can; for I expect my Master presently,
and I would not for double the Money he should find you here.' 'Then you have a
Master,' cries Jones; indeed you will excuse me, good Woman, but I was
surprised to see all those fine Things in your House.' 'Ah, Sir!' said she, 'if
the twentieth Part of these Things were mine, I should think myself a rich
Woman; but pray, Sir, do not stay much longer: For I look for him in every
Minute.' -- 'Why sure he would not be angry with you,' said Jones, 'for doing a
common Act of Charity. Alack-a-day, Sir,' said she, 'he is a strange Man, not
at all like other People. He keeps no Company with any Body, and seldom walks
out but by Night, for he does not care to be seen; and all the Country People
are as much afraid of meeting him; for his Dress is enough to frighten those
who are not used to it. They call him, The Man of the Hill (for there he walks
by Night) and the Country People are not, I believe, more afraid of the Devil
himself. He would be terribly angry if he found you here.' 'Pray, Sir,' says
Partridge, 'don't let us offend the Gentleman, I am ready to walk, and was
never warmer in my Life. -- Do, pray Sir, let us go -- here are Pistols over
the Chimney; who knows whether they be charged or no, or what he may do with
them.' 'Fear nothing, Partridge,' cries Jones, 'I will secure thee from
Danger.' -- 'Nay, for Matter of that, he never does any Mischief,' said the
Woman; 'but to be sure it is necessary he should keep some Arms for his own
Safety: for his House has been beset more than once, and it is not many Nights
ago, that we thought we heard Thieves about it: for my own Part, I have often
wondered that he is not murdered by some Villain or other, as he walks out by
himself at such Hours; but then as I said, the People are afraid of him, and
besides they think, I suppose, he has nothing about him worth taking.' 'I
should imagine, by this Collection of Rarities,' cries Jones, that your Master
had been a Traveller.' 'Yes, Sir,' answered she, 'he has been a very great
one; there be few Gentlemen that know more of all Matters than he; I fancy he
has been crossed in Love, or whatever it is, I know not, but I have lived with
him above these thirty Years, and in all that Time he has hardly spoke to six
living People.' She then again solicited their Departure, in which she was
backed by Partridge; but Jones purposely protracted the time: For his Curiosity
was greatly raised to see this extraordinary Person. Though the old Woman,
therefore, concluded every one of her Answers with desiring him to be gone, and
Partridge proceed so far as to pull him by the Sleeve, he still continued to
invent new Questions, till the old Woman with an affrighted Countenance,
declared she heard her Master's Signal; and at the same Instant more than one
Voice was heard without the Door, ^rying, 'D -- n your Blood, show us your
Money this Instant. Your Money, you Villain, or we will blow your Brains about
your Ears.

'O, good Heaven!' cries the old Woman. 'Some Villains, to be sure, have
attacked my Master. O la! what shall I do? what shall I do?' 'How, cries Jones,
how -- Are these Pistols loaded?' 'O, Good Sir, there is nothing in them,
indeed -- O, pray don't murder us, Gentlemen,' (for in reality she now had the
same Opinion of those within, as she had for those without.) Jones made her no
Answer; but snatching an old Broad-sword which hung ^n the Room, he instantly
sallied out, where he found the old Gentleman struggling with two Ruffians, and
begging for Mercy. Jones asked no Questions, but ^ell so briskly to work with
his Broad-sword, that the Fellows immediately quitted their Hold, and without
offering to attack our Hero, betook themselves to their Heels, and made their
Escape; for he did not attempt to pursue them, being contented with having
delivered the old Gentleman; and indeed he concluded he had pretty well done
their Business: For both of them, as they ran off, cried out with bitter Oaths,
that they were dead Men.

Jones presently ran to lift up the old Gentleman, who had been thrown down in
the Scuffle, expressed ^t the same Time great Concern, lest he should have
^eceived any Harm from the Villians. The old Man ^ared a Moment at Jones, and
then cried, -- 'No, Sir, no, I have very little Harm, I thank you. Lord have
mercy upon me.' 'I see Sir,' said ^ones, 'you are not free from Apprehensions
even of those who have had the Happiness to be your Deliverers; nor can I blame
any Suspicions which you may have; but indeed, you have no real Occasion for
any; here are none but your Friends present. Having mist our Way this cold
Night, we took the Liberty of warming ourselves at your Fire, whence we were
just departing when we heard you call for Assistance, which I must say,
Providence alone seems to have sent you.' -- 'Providence indeed,' cries the old
Gentleman, 'if it be so.' -- 'So it is, I assure you,' cries Jones, 'here is
your own Sword, Sir. I have used it in your Defense, and I now return it into
your own Hand.' The old Man having received the Sword, which was stained with
the Blood of his Enemies, looked steadfastly at Jones during some Moments, and
then with a Sigh, cried out, 'You will pardon me, young Gentleman, I was not
always of a suspicious Temper, nor am I a Friend to Ingratitude.' 'Be thankful
then,' cries Jones, 'to that Providence to which you owe your Deliverance; as
to my Part, I have only discharged the common Duties of Humanity, and what I
would have done for any Fellow Creature in your Situation.' Let me look at you
a little longer,' cries the old Gentleman -- 'You are a human Creature then? --
'Well, perhaps, you are. Come, pray walk into my little Hutt. You have been my'
Deliverer indeed.

The old Woman was distracted between the Fears which she had of her Master,
and for him; and Partridge was, if possible, in a greater Fright. The former of
these, however, when she heard her Master speak kindly to Jones, and perceived
what had happened, came again to herself; but Partridge no sooner saw the
Gentleman, than the Strangeness of his Dress infused greater Terrors into that
poor Fellow, than he had before felt either from the strange Description which
he had heard, or from the Uproar which had happened at the Door.

To say the Truth, it was an Appearance which might have affected a more
constant Mind than that of Mr. Partridge. This Person was of the tallest ^ize,
with a long Beard as white as Snow. His Bo^y was clothed with the Skin of an
Ass, made something into the Form of a Coat. He wore likewise Boots on his
Legs, and a Cap on his Head, both composed of the Skin of some other Animals.

As soon as the old Gentleman came into his House, ^he old Woman began her
Congratulations on his hap^y Escape from the Ruffins. 'Yes,' cries he, 'I have
escaped indeed, Thanks to my Preserver.' O the Blessing on him,' answered she,
'he is a good Gentleman, I warrant him. I was afraid your Worship would have
been angry with me for letting him in; and to be certain I should not have done
it, had not I seen by the Moonlight, that he was a Gentleman, and almost
frozen to Death. And to be certain it must have been some good Angel that sent
him hither, and tempted me to do it.

'I am afraid, Sir,' said the old Gentleman to ^ones, 'that I have nothing in
this House which you can either eat or drink, unless you will accept a Dram of
Brandy; of which I can give you some most excellent, and which I have had by me
these thirty Years.' Jones declined this Offer in a very ^ivil and proper
Speech, and then the other asked him 'Whither he was traveling when he mist
his Way; saying, I must own myself surprised to see such a Person as you appear
to be journeying on Foot at this Time of Night. I suppose, Sir, you are a
Gentleman of these Parts: for you do not look like one who is used to travel
far without Horses.

'Appearances,' cried Jones, 'are often deceitful; Men sometimes look like what
they are not. I assure you, I am not of this Country, and whither I am
traveling, in reality I scarce know myself.

'Whoever you are, or whithersoever you are going, answered the old Man, I have
Obligations to' you which I can never return.

'I once more,' replied Jones, 'affirm, that you have none: For there can be no
Merit in having hazarded that in your Service on which I set no Value. And
nothing is so contemptible in my Eye^' as Life.

'I am sorry, young Gentleman,' answered the Stranger, 'that you have any
Reason to be so unhappy' at your Years.

'Indeed I am, Sir,' answered Jones, 'the mo^^ unhappy of Mankind.' -- 'Perhaps
you have ha^ a Friend, or a Mistress,' replied the other. 'Ho^ could you,'
cries Jones, 'mention two Words sufficient to drive me to Distraction?' 'Either
of ther^ are enough to drive any Man to Distraction,' answered the old Man. 'I
enquire no farther, Sir Perhaps my Curiosity has led me too far already.'

'Indeed, Sir, cries Jones, 'I cannot censure Passion, which I feel at this
Instant in the highe^ Degree. You will pardon me, when I assure you that every
Thing which I have seen or heard sin^^ I first entered this House, has
conspired to raise the greatest Curiosity in me. Something very extraordinary
must have determined you to this Cour^ of Life, and I have reason to fear your
own History' is not without Misfortunes.'

Here the old Gentleman again sighed, and remained silent for some Minutes; at
last, looking earnest on Jones, he said, 'I have read that a good Count^nance
is a Letter of recommendation; if so, no^ ever can be more strongly recommended
than your self. If I did not feel some Yearnings towar^ you from another
Consideration, I must be the mo^^ ungrateful Monster upon Earth; and I am
real^^ concerned it is no otherwise in my Power, than' Words, to convince you
of my Gratitude.'

Jones after a Moment's Hesitation, answered, 'That it was in his Power by
Words to gratify him extremely. I have confessed a Curiosity, said he, Sir; need
I say how much obliged I should be to you, if you would condescend to gratify
it? Will you suffer me therefore to beg, unless any Consideration restrains
you, that you would be pleased to acquaint me what Motives have induced you
thus to withdraw from the Society of Mankind, and to betake yourself to a
Course of Life to which it sufficiently' appears you was not born?

'I scarce think myself at Liberty to refuse you any thing, after what has
happened,' replied the old Man, 'If you desire therefore to hear the Story of
an unhappy Man, I will relate it to you. Indeed you judge rightly, in thinking
there is commonly something extraordinary in the Fortunes of those who fly from
Society: For however it may seem a Paradox, or even a Contradiction, certain it
is that great Philanthropy chiefly inclines us to avoid and detest Mankind; not
on Account so much of their private and selfish Vices, but for those of a
relative Kind; such as Envy, Malice, Treachery, Cruelty, with every other
Species of Malevolence. These are the Vices which true Philanthropy abhors, and
which rather than see and converse with, she avoids Society itself. However,
without a Compliment to you, you do not appear to me one of those whom I should
shun or detest; nay, I must say, in what little has dropped from you, there
appears some Parity in our Fortunes; I hope however yours will conclude more
successfully.'

Here some Compliments passed between our Hero and his Host, and then the
latter was going to begin his History, when Partridge interrupted him. His
Apprehensions had now pretty well left him; but some Effects of his Terrors
remained; he therefore reminded the Gentleman of that excellent Brandy which he
had mentioned. This was presently brought, and Partridge swallowed a large
Bumper.

The Gentleman then, without any farther Preface, began as you may read in the
next Chapter.

CHAP. XI. In which the Man of the Hill begins to relate his History.
'I Was born in a Village of Somersetshire, called Mark, in the Year 1657; my
Father was one of those whom they call Gentlemen Farmers. He had a little
Estate of about 300l. a Year of his own, and rented another Estate of near the
same Value. He was prudent and industrious, and so good a Husbandman, that he
might have led a very easy and comfortable Life, had not an errant Vixe^ of a
Wife soured his domestic Quiet. But tho this Circumstance perhaps made him
miserable, i^ did not make him poor: For he confined her almost entirely at
Home, and rather chose to bear eeternal Upbraidings in his own House, than to
injur^ his Fortune by indulging her in the Extravagancie^' she desired abroad.

'By this Xantippe (so was the Wife of Socrate^ called, said Partridge) 'By
this Xantippe he had two Sons, of which I was the younger. He designe^ to give
us both good Educations; but my elde^^ Brother, who, unhappily for him, was the
Favourit^ of my Mother, utterly neglected his Learning insomuch that after
having been five or six Years a^ School with little or no Improvement, my
Father being told by his Master, that it would be to n^^ Purpose to keep him
longer there, at last complie^ with my Mother in taking him home from the Hand
of that Tyrant, as she called his Master; thoug^^ indeed he gave the Lad much
less Correction tha^ his Idleness deserved, but much more, it seem than the
young Gentleman liked, who constantly complained to his Mother of his severe
Treatment,' and she as constantly gave him a Hearing.

"Yes, yes,' cries Partridge, 'I have seen such Mothers; I have been abused
myself by them, and very unjustly; such Parents deserve Correction' as much as
their Children.

Jones chid the Pedagogue for this Interruption, and then the Stranger
proceeded. 'My Brother now at the Age of fifteen, bid adieu to all Learning,
and to every Thing else but to his Dog and Gun, with which latter he became so
expert, that, though perhaps you may think it incredible, he could not only hit
a standing Mark with great Certainty; but has actually shot a Crow as it was
flying in the Air. He was likewise excellent at finding a Hare sitting, and was
soon reputed one of the best Sportsmen in the Country. A Reputation which both
he and his Mother enjoyed as much as if he had been thought the finest Scholar.

'The Situation of my Brother made me at first think my Lot the harder, in
being continued at School; but I soon changed my Opinion; for as I advanced
pretty fast in Learning, my Labors became easy, and my Exercise so delightful,
that Holidays were my most unpleasant Time: For my Mother, who never loved me,
now apprehending that I had the greater Share of my Father's Affection, and
finding, or at least thinking, that I was more taken Notice of by some
Gentlemen of Learning, and particularly by the Parson of the Parish, than my
Brother, she now hated my Sight, and made Home so disagreeable to me, that what
is called by Schoolboys Black Monday, was to me the whitest in the whole Year.

'Having, at length, gone through the School at Taunton, I was thence removed
to Exeter College in Oxford, where I remained four Years at the End of which an
Accident happened, that put a final End to my Studies, and whence I may truly
date the Rise of all which happened to me afterward in Life.'

'There was at the same College with myself one Sir George Gresham, a young
Fellow who was entitled to a very considerable Fortune; which he was not, by
the Will of his Father, to come into full Possession of till he arrived at the
Age of Twenty-five. However, the Liberality of his Guardians gave him little
Cause to regret the abundant Caution of his Father: for they allowed him Five
hundred Pound a Year while he remained at the University, where he kept his
Horses and his Whore, and lived as wicked and as profligate a Life, as he could
have done, had he been never so entirely Master of his Fortune; for besides the
Five hundred a Year which he received from his Guardians, he found Means to
spend a thousand more. He was above the Age of Twenty-one, and had no
Difficulty of gaining what Credit he pleased.'

'This young Fellow, among many other tolerable bad Qualities, had one very
diabolical. He had a great Delight in destroying and ruining the Youth of
inferior Fortune, by drawing them into Expenses which they could not afford so
well as himself; and the better, and worthier, and soberer, any young Man was,
the greater Pleasure and Triumph had he in his Destruction. Thus acting the
Character which is recorded of the Devil, and going about seeking whom he might
devour.'

'It was my Misfortune to fall into an Acquaintance and Intimacy with this
Gentleman. My Reputation of Diligence in my Studies made me a desirable Object
of his mischievous Intention; and my own Inclination made it sufficiently easy
for him to effect his Purpose; for though I had applied myself with much Industry
to Books, in which I took great Delight, there were other Pleasures in which I
was capable of taking much greater; for I was high-mettled, had a violent Flow
of animal Spirits, was a little ambitious, and extremely amorous.'

'I had not long contracted an Intimacy with Sir George, before I became a
Partaker of all his Pleasures; and when I was once entered on that Scene,
neither my Inclination, nor my Spirit, would suffer me to play an Under-Part. I
was second to none of the Company in any Acts of Debauchery: nay, I soon
distinguished myself so notably in all Riots and Disorders, that my Name
generally stood first in the Roll of Delinquents, and instead of being lamented
as the unfortunate Pupil of Sir George, I was now accused as the Person who had
misled and debauched that hopeful young Gentleman; for though he was the
Ringleader and Promoter of all the Mischief, he was never so considered. I
fell at last under the Censure of the Vice Chancellor, and very narrowly
escaped Expulsion.

'You will easily believe, Sir, that such a Life, as I am now describing must
be incompatible with my further Progress in Learning; and that in Proportion as
I addicted myself more and more to loose Pleasure, I must grow more and more
remiss in Application to my Studies. This was truly the Consequence; but this
was not all. My Expenses now greatly exceeded not only my former Income, but
those Additions which I extorted from my poor generous Father, by Pretenses of
Sums necessary for preparing for my approaching Degree of Bachelor of Arts.
These Demands, however, grew at last so frequent and exorbitant, that my
Father, by slow Degrees, opened his Ears to the Accounts which he received from
many Quarters of my present Behavior, and which my Mother failed not to echo
very faithfully and loudly; adding, 'Ay, this is the fine Gentleman, the
Scholar who does so much Honor to his Family, and is to be the making of it. I
thought what all his Learning would come to. He is to be the Ruin of us all, I
find, after his elder Brother has been denied Necessaries for his Sake, to
perfect his Education forsooth, for which he was to pay us such Interest; I
thought what the Interest would come to:" with much more of the same Kind; but
I have, I believe, satisfied you with this Taste.'

'My Father, therefore, began now to return Remonstrances, instead of Money, to
my Demands, which brought my Affairs, perhaps a little sooner to a Crisis; but
had he remitted me his whole Income, you will imagine it could have sufficed a
very short Time to support one who kept Pace with the Expenses of Sir George
Gresham.

'It is more than possible, that the Distress I was now in for Money, and the
Impracticability of going on in this Manner, might have restored me at once to
my Senses, and to my Studies, had I opened my Eyes, before I became involved in
Debts, from which I saw no Hopes of ever extricating myself. This was indeed
the great Art of Sir George, and by which he accomplished the Ruin of many,
whom he afterward laughed at as Fools and Coxcombs, for vying as he called it,
with a Man of his Fortune. To bring this about, he would now and then advance a
little Money himself, in order to support the Credit of the unfortunate Youth
with other People; till, by Means of that very Credit, he was irretrievably
undone.'

'My Mind being by these Means, grown as desperate as my Fortune, there was
scarce a Wickedness which I did not meditate, in order for my Relief.
Self-murder itself became the Subject of my serious Deliberation; and I had
certainly resolved on it, had not a more shameful, though perhaps less sinful,
Thought, expelled it from my Head.' Here he hesitated a Moment, and then cried
out, 'I protest, so many Years have not washed away the Shame of this Act, and
I shall blush while I relate it. 'Jones desired him to pass over any thing that
might give him pain in the Relation;' but Partridge eagerly cried out, 'O pray,
Sir, let us hear this, I had rather hear this than all the rest; as I hoped to
be saved, I will never mention a Word of it.' Jones was going to rebuke him,
but the Stranger prevented it by proceeding thus. 'I had a Chum, a very prudent
frugal young Lad, who, though he had no very large Allowance, had by his
Parsimony heaped up upwards of forty Guineas, which I knew he kept in his
Escritore, I took therefore an Opportunity of purloining his Key from his
Breeches Pocket while he was asleep, and thus made myself Master of all his
Riches. After which I again conveyed his Key into his Pocket, and
counterfeiting Sleep, though I never once closed my Eyes, lay in Bed till after
he arose and went to Prayers, an Exercise to which I had long been
unaccustomed.'

'Timorous Thieves, by extreme Caution, often subject themselves to
Discoveries, which those of a bolder Kind escape. Thus it happened to me; for
had I boldly broke open his Escritore. I had, perhaps, escaped even his
Suspicion; but as it was plain that the Person who robbed him had possessed
himself of his Key, he had no Doubt, when he first missed his Money, but that
his Chum was certainly the Thief. Now as he was of a fearful Disposition, and
much my Inferior in Strength, and, I believe, in Courage, he did not dare to
confront me with my Guilt, for fear of worse bodily Consequences which might
happen to him. He repaired therefore immediately to the Vice Chancellor, and,
upon swearing to the Robbery, and to the Circumstances of it, very easily
obtained a Warrant against one who had now so bad a Character through the whole
University.'

'Luckily for me I lay out of the College the next Evening; for that Day I
attended a young Lady in a Chaise to Whitney, where we staid all Night; and in
our Return the next Morning to Oxford, I met one of my Cronies, who acquainted
me with sufficient News concerning myself to make me turn my Horse another
Way.'

'Pray Sir, did he mention any thing of the Warrant,' said Partridge? But Jones
begged the Gentleman to proceed without regarding any impertinent' Questions;
which he did as follows.

'Having now abandoned all Thoughts of returning to Oxford, the next Thing
which offered itself was a Journey to London. I imparted this Intention to my
female Companion, who at first remonstrated against it, but upon producing my
Wealth, she immediately consented. We then struck across the Country into the
great Cirencester Road, and made such Haste, that we spent the next Evening
(save one) in London.'

'When you consider the Place where I now was, and the Company with whom I was,
you will, I fancy, conceive that a very short Time brought me to an End of that
Sum of which I had so iniquitously' possessed myself.

'I was now reduced to a much higher Degree of Distress than before; the
Necessaries of Life began to be numbered among my Wants; and what made my Case
still the more grievous, was, that my Paramour, of whom I was now grown
immoderately fond, shared the same Distresses with myself. To see a Woman you
love in Distress; to be unable to relieve her, and at the same Time to reflect
that you have brought her into this Situation, is, perhaps, Curse of which no
Imagination can represent the Horrors to those who have not felt it.' I believe
it from my Soul,' cries Jones, 'and I pity you from the Bottom of my Heart.' He
then took two or three disorderly Turns about the Room, and at last begged
Pardon, and flung himself into his Chair, crying, 'I thank Heaven I have
escaped that.'

'This Circumstance,' continued the Gentleman, 'so severely aggravated the
Horrors of my present Situation, that they became absolutely intolerable. I
could with less Pain endure the raging of my own natural unsatisfied Appetites,
even Hunger or Thirst, than I could submit to leave ungratified the most
whimsical Desires of a Woman, on whom I so extravagantly doated, that though I
knew she had been the Mistress of half my Acquaintance, I firmly intended to
marry her. But the good Creature was unwilling to consent to an Action which
the World might think so much to my Disadvantage. And as, possibly, she
compassionated the daily Anxieties which she must have perceived me suffer on
her Account, she resolved to put an End to my Distress. She soon, indeed, found
Means to relieve me from my troublesome and perplexed Situation: For while I
was distracted with various Inventions to supply her with Pleasures, she very
kindly -- betrayed me to one of her former Lovers at Oxford, by whose Care and
Diligence I was immediately apprehended and committed to Goal.'

'Here I first began seriously to reflect on the Miscarriages of my former
Life; on the Errors I had been guilty of; on the Misfortunes which I had
brought on myself; and on the Grief which I must have occasioned to one of the
best of Fathers. When I added to all these the Perfidy of my Mistress, such was
the Horror of my Mind, that Life, instead of being longer desirable, grew the
Object of my Abhorrence, and I could have gladly embraced Death, as my dearest
Friend, if it had offered itself to my Choice unattended by Shame.'

'The Time of the Assizes soon came, and I was removed by Habeas Corpus to
Oxford, where I expected certain Conviction and Condemnation; but, to my great
Surprise, none appeared against me, and I was, at the End of the Sessions,
discharged for Want of Prosecution. In short, my Chum had left Oxford, and
whether from Indolence, or from what other Motive, I am ignorant, had declined
concerning himself any farther in the Affair.'

'Perhaps,' cries Partridge, 'he did not care to have your Blood upon his
Hands, and he was in the right on it. If any Person was to be hanged upon my
Evidence, I should never be able to lie alone afterward, for Fear of seeing
his Ghost.'

'I shall shortly doubt, Partridge,' says Jones, 'whether thou art more brave
or wise. 'You may laugh at me, Sir, if you please,' answered Partridge, 'but if
you will hear a very short Story which I can tell, and which is most certainly
true, perhaps you may change your Opinion. In the Parish where I was born --
Here Jones would have silenced him, but the Stranger interceded that he might
be permitted to tell his Story, and in the mean time promised to recollect the
Remainder of his own.

Partridge then proceeded thus. 'In the Parish where I was born, there lived a
Farmer whose Name was Bridle, and he had a Son named Francis a good hopeful
young Fellow; I was at the Grammar School with him, where I remember he wa^ got
into Ovid's Epistles, and he could construe yo^ three Lines together sometimes
without looking into a Dictionary. Besides all this, he was a very goo^ Lad,
never missed Church of Sundays, and was rec+ koned one of the best
Psalm-Singers in the whole Parish. He would indeed now and then take a Cup too
much, and that was the only Fault he had.' -- Well, but come to the Ghost.'
cries Jones. 'Never fear, Sir, I shall come to him soon enough,' answered
Partridge.'You must know then, that Farmer Bridle lost a Mare, a sorrel one to
the best of my Remembrance, and so it fell out, that this young Francis shortly
afterward being at a Fair at Hindon, and as I think it was on -- I cannot
remember the Day; and being as he was, what should he happen to meet, but a Man
upon his Father's Mare. Frank called out presently, Stop Thief; and it being in
the Middle of the Fair, it was impossible, you know, for the Man to make his
Escape. So they apprehended him, and carried him before the Justice, I remember
it was Justice Willoughby of Noyle, a very worthy good Gentleman, and he
committed him to Prison, and bound Frank in a Recognizance, I think they call
it, a hard Word compounded of re and cognosco, but it differs in its Meaning
from the Use of the Simple, as many other Compounds do. Well, at last, down
came my Lord Justice Page to hold the Assizes, and so the Fellow was had up,
and Frank was had up for a Witness. To be sure I shall never forget the Face of
the Judge, when he begun to ask him what he had to say against the Prisoner. He
made poor Frank tremble and shake in his Shoes. Well, you Fellow, says my Lord,
what have you to say? Don't stand humming and hawing, but speak out; but
however he soon turned altogether as civil to Frank, and began to thunder at
the Fellow; and when he asked him, if he had any Thing to say for himself, the
Fellow said he had found the Horse. Ay!' answered the Judge, 'thou art a lucky
Fellow; I have traveled the Circuit these forty Years, and never found a Horse
in my Life; but I Will tell thee what, Friend, thou wast more lucky than thou
did know of: For thou did not only find a Horse; but a Halter too, I
promise thee. To be sure I shall never forget the Word. Upon which every Body
fell a laughing, as how could they help it. Nay, and twenty other Jests he made
which I cannot remember now. There was something about his Skill in Horse Flesh,
which made all the Folks laugh. To be certain the Judge must have been a very
brave Man, as well as a Man of much Learning. It is indeed charming Sport to
hear Trials upon Life and Death. One Thing I own I thought a little hard, that
the Prisoner's Counsel was not suffered to speak for him, though he desired
only to be heard one very short Word; but my Lord would not hearken to him,
though he suffered a Counselor to talk against him for above half an Hour. I
thought it hard, I own, that there should be so many of them; my Lord, and the
Court, and the Jury, and the Counselors, and the Witnesse^ all upon one poor
Man, and he too in Chains* Well, the Fellow was hanged, as to be sure it could
be no otherwise, and poor Frank could never be easy about it. He never was in
the dark alone, bu^ he fancied he saw the Fellow's Spirit. Well, and is this
thy Story, cries Jones? No, no, answered Partridge, 'O Lord have Mercy upon me,
-- I am just now coming to the Matter; for one Night coming from the Alehouse
in a long narrow dar^ Lane, there he ran directly up against him, and the
Spirit was all in white and fell upon Frank, and Frank who is a sturdy Lad,
fell upon the Spirit again, and there they had a Tussel together, an^ poor
Frank was dreadfully beat; indeed he made ^ shift at last to crawl Home, but
what with the beating, and what with the Fright, he lay ill above Fortnight;
and all this is most certainly true, and the whole Parish will bear Witness to
it.'

The Stranger smiled at this Story, and Jones burst into a loud Fit of
Laughter, upon which Partridge cried, 'Ay, you may laugh, Sir, and so did some
others, particularly a Squire, who is thought to be no better than an Atheist;
who forsooth, because there was a Calf with a white Face found dead in the same
Lane the next Morning, would fain have it, that the Battle was between Frank
and that, as if a Calf would set upon a Man. Besides, Frank told me he knew it
to be a Spirit, and could swear to him in any Court in Christendom, and he had
not drank above a Quart or two, or such a Matter of Liquor at the time. Lud
have Mercy upon us, and keep us all from dipping our Hands in Blood, I say.'

'Well, Sir,' said Jones to the Stranger, 'Mr. Partridge has finished his
Story, and I hope will give you no future Interruption, if you will be so kind
to proceed. He then resumed his Narration; but as he has taken Breath for a
while, we think proper to give it to our Reader, and shall therefore put an End
to this Chapter.'

CHAP. XII. In which the Man of the Hill continues his History.
'I Had now regained my Liberty, said the Stranger, but I had lost my
Reputation; for there is a wide Difference between the Case of a Man who is
barely acquitted of a Crime in a Court of Justice, and of him who is acquitted
in his own Heart, and in the Opinion of the People. I was conscious of my
Guilt, and ashamed to look any one in the Face, so resolved to leave Oxford the
next Morning, before the Daylight discovered me to the Eyes of any Beholders.'

'When I had got clear of the City, it first entered into my Head to return
Home to my Father, and endeavor to obtain his Forgiveness; but as I had no
Reason to doubt his Knowledge of all which had past, and as I was well assured
of his great Aversion to all Acts of Dishonesty, I could entertain no Hopes of
being received by him, especially since I was too certain of all the good
Offices in the Power of my Mother: Nay, had my Father's Pardon been as sure, as
I conceived his Resentment to be, I yet question whether I could have had the
Assurance to behold him, or whether I could, upon any Terms, have submitted to
live and converse with those, who, I was convinced, knew me to have been guilty
of so base an Action.'

'I hastened therefore back to London, the best Retirement of either Grief or
Shame, unless for Persons of a very public Character; for here you have the
Advantage of Solitude without its Disadvantage, since you may be alone and in
Company at the same Time; and while you walk or sit unobserved, Noise, Hurry,
and a constant Succession of Objects, entertain the Mind, and prevent the
Spirits from preying on themselves, or rather on Grief or Shame, which are the
most unwholesome Diet in the World; and on which (though there are many who
never taste either but in public) there are some who can feed very plentifully,
and very fatally when alone.'

'But as there is scarce any human Good without its concommitant Evil, so there
are People who find an Inconvenience in this unobserving Temper of Mankind; I
mean Persons who have no Money; for as you are not put out of Countenance, so
neither are you clothed or fed by those who do not know you. And a Man may be
as easily starved in Leadenhall Market as in the Deserts of Arabia.'

'It was at present my Fortune to be destitute of that great Evil, as it is
apprehended to be by several Writers, who I suppose were over burdened with
it, namely, Money.' "With Submission, Sir, said Partridge, I do not remember
any Writers who have called it Malorum; but Irritamenta Malorum. Effodiuntur
opes irritamenta Malorum." Well, Sir, continued the Stranger, whether it be an
Evil, or only the Cause of Evil, I was entirely void of it, and at the same
Time of Friends, and as I thought of Acquaintance; when one Evening as I was
passing through the Inner Temple, very hungry and very miserable, I heard a
Voice on a suden haling me with great Familiarity by my Christian Name; and
upon my turning about, I presently recollected the Person who so saluted me, to
have been my Fellow Collegiate; one who had left the University above a Year,
and long before any of my Misfortunes had befallen me. This Gentleman, whose
Name was Watson, shook me heartily by the Hand, and expressing great Joy at
meeting me, proposed our immediately drinking a Bottle together. I first
declined the Proposal, and pretended Business; but as he was very earnest and
pressing, Hunger at last overcame my Pride, and I fairly confessed to him I had
no Money in my Pocket; yet not without framing a Lie for an Excuse, and
imputing it to my having changed my Breeches that Morning. Mr. Watson answered,
I thought Jack, you and I had been too old Acquaintance for you to mention such
a Matter. He then took me by the Arm and was pulling me along; but I gave him
very little Trouble, for my own Inclinations pulled me much stronger than he
could do.'

'We then went into the Friars, which you know is the Scene of all Mirth and
Jollity. Here when we arrived at the Tavern, Mr. Watson applied himself to the
Drawer only, without taking the least Notice of the Cook; for he had no
Suspicion, but that I had dined long since. However, as the Case was really
otherwise, I forged another Falsehood, and told my Companion, I had been at the
further End of the City on Business of Consequence, and had snapt up a Mutton
Chop in Haste, so that I was again Hungry, and wished he would add a Beef Steak
to his Bottle.' 'Some People, cries Partridge, 'ought to have good Memories, or
did you find just Money enough in your Breeches to pay for the Mutton Chop?'
'Your Observation is right,' answered the Stranger, 'and I believe such
Blunders are inseparable from all dealing in Untruth. -- But to proceed -- I
began now to feel myself extremely happy. The Meat and Wine soon revived my
Spirits to a high Pitch, and I enjoyed much Pleasure in the Conversation of my
old Acquaintance, the rather, as I thought him entirely ignorant of what had
happened at the University since his leaving' it.

'But he did not suffer me to remain long in this agreeable Delusion; for
taking a Bumper in one Hand, and holding me by the other, "Here, my Boy," cries
he, "here is wishing you Joy of your being so honorably acquitted of that
Affair laid to your Charge." 'I was Thunderstruck with Confusion at these
Words, which Watson observing, proceeded thus -- Nay, never be ashamed, Man;
thou have been acquitted, and no one now dares call thee guilty; but prithee do
tell me, who am thy Friend, I hope thou did really rob him; for rat me if it
was not a meritorious Action to strip such a sneaking pitiful Rascal, and
instead of the two hundred Guineas, I wish you had taken as many thousand.
Come, come, my Boy, don't be shy of confessing to me, you are not now brought
before one of the Pimps. D -- n me, if I don't honor you for it; for as I hope
for Salvation, I would have made no manner of Scruple of doing the same Thing.'

'This Declaration a little relieved my Abashment, and as Wine had now somewhat
opened my Heart, I very freely acknowledged the Robbery, but acquainted him
that he had been misinformed as to the Sum taken, which was little more than a
fifth Part of what he had mentioned.'

'I am sorry for it with all my Heart, quoth he, and I wish thee better Success
another Time. Though if you will take my Advice, you shall have no Occasion' to
run any such Risque. Here, said he, (taking some Dice out of his Pocket)
'here's the Stuff. Here are the Implements; here are the little Doctors which
cure the Distempers of the Purse. Follow but my Counsel, and I will show you a
Way to empty the Pockets of a Queer Cull, without any Danger of the Nubbing
Cheat.'

'Nubbing Cheat,' cries Partridge, 'Pay, Sir, what is that?'

'Why that, Sir,' says the Stranger, 'is a Cant Phrase for the Gallows; for as
Gamesters differ little from Highwaymen in their Morals, so do they' very much
resemble them in their Language.

'We had now each drank our Bottle, when Mr. Watson said, the Board was
sitting, and that he must attend, earnestly pressing me, at the same Time, to
go with him and try my Fortune. I answered, He knew that was at present out of
my Power, as I had informed him of the emptiness of my Pocket. To say the
Truth, I doubted not, from his many strong Expressions of Friendship, but that
he would offer to lend me a small Sum for that Purpose; but he answered, "Never
mind' that, Man, even boldly run a Levant; (Partridge was going to enquire the
Meaning of that Word; but Jones stopped his Mouth;) 'but be circumspect as to
the Man. I will tip you the proper Person, which may be necessary, as you do
not know the Town, nor can distinguish a Rum Cull from a Queer one.'

'The Bill was now brought, when Watson paid his Share, and was departing. I
reminded him, not without blushing, of my having no Money.' He answered, 'That
signifies nothing, score it behind the Door, or make a bold Brush, and take no
Notice -- Or -- stay," says he, "I will go down Stairs first, and then do you
take up my Money, and score the whole Reckoning at the Bar, and I will wait for
you at the Corner." 'I expressed some Dislike at this, and hinted my
Expectations that he would have deposited the whole; but he swore he had not
another Sixpence in his Pocket.'

'He then went down, and I was prevailed on to take up the Money and follow
him, which I did close enough to hear him tell the Drawer the Reckoning was
upon the Table. The Drawer passed by me up Stairs; but I made such Haste into
the Street, that I heard nothing of his Disappointment, nor did I mention a
Syllable at the Bar according to my Instructions.'

'We now went directly to the Gaming Table, where Mr. Watson, to my Surprise,
pulled out a large Sum of Money, and placed before him, as did many others; all
of them, no doubt, considering their own Heaps as so many decoy Birds, which
were to entice and draw over the Heaps of' their Neighbors.

'Here it would be tedious to relate all the Freaks which Fortune, or rather
the Dice, played in this her Temple. Mountains of Gold were in a few Moments
reduced to nothing at one Part of the Table, and rose as suddenly in another.
The rich grew in a Moment poor, and the Poor as suddenly became rich: so that
it seemed a Philosopher could no where have so well instructed his Pupils in
the Contempt of Riches, at least he could no where have better inculcated the
Incertainty of their Duration.'

'For my own Part, after having considerably improved my small Estate, I at
last entirely demolished it. Mr. Watson too, after much Variety of Luck, rose
from the Table in some Heat, and declared he had lost a cool hundred, and would
play no longer. Then coming up to me, he asked me to return with him to the
Tavern; but I positively refused, saying, I would not bring myself a second
Time into such a Dilemma, and especially as he had lost all his Money, and was
now in my own Condition.' Pooh," says he, "I have just borrowed a couple of
Guineas of a Friend; and one of them is at your Service." 'He immediately put
one of them into my Hand, and I no longer resisted his Inclination.'

'I was at first a little shocked at returning to the same House whence we had
departed in so unhandsome a Manner; but when the Drawer, with very civil
Address, told us, "he believed we had forgot to pay our Reckoning," I became
perfectly easy, and very readily gave him a Guinea, bid him pay himself, and
acquiesced in the unjust Charge which had been laid on my Memory.'

'Mr. Watson now bespoke the most extravagant Supper he could well think of,
and though he had contented himself with simple Claret before, nothing but the
most precious Burgundy would serve his Purpose.'

'Our Company was soon increased by the Addition of several Gentlemen from the
Gaming-Table; most of whom, as I afterward found, came not to the Tavern to
drink, but in the Way of Business: for the true Gamesters pretended to be ill,
and refused their Glass, while they plied heartily two young Fellows, who were
to be afterward pillaged, as indeed they were without Mercy. Of this Plunder I
had the good Fortune to be a Sharer, tho I was not yet let into the Secret.'

'There was one remarkable Accident attended this Tavern Play; for the Money,
by Degrees totally disappeared, so that though at the Beginning the Table was
half covered with Gold, yet before the Play ended, which it did not till the
next Day being Sunday, at Noon, there was scarce a Guine^ to be seen on the
Table; and this was the stranger as every Person present except myself declared
h^ had lost; and what was become of the Money unless the Devil himself carried
it away, is difficult to determine.'

'Most certainly he did,' says Partridge, 'for evi^ Spirits can carry away any
Thing without being seen, though there were never so many Folk in the Room; and I
should not have been surprised if h^ had carried away all the Company of a Set
of wicked Wretches, who were at play in Sermon-time And I could tell you a true
Story, if I would where the Devil took a man out of Bed from another Man's
Wife, and carried him away through the Keyhole of the Door. I Have seen the very
House where it was done, and no Body has lived in i^ these thirty Years.'

Though Jones was a little offended by the Impertinence of Partridge, he could
not however avoi^ smiling at his Simplicity. The Stranger did the same, and
then proceeded with his Story, as will be seen in the next Chapter.

CHAP. XIII. In which the foregoing Story is farther continued.
'MY Fellow Collegiate had now entered me in a new Scene of Life. I soon became
acquainted with the whole Fraternity of Sharpers, and was let into their
Secrets. I mean into the Knowledge of those gross Cheats which are proper to
impose on the raw and unexperienced: For there are some Tricks of a finer Kind,
which are only known to a few of the Gang, who are at the Head of their
Profession; a Degree of Honor beyond my Expectation; for Drink, to which I was
immoderately addicted, and the natural Warmth of my Passions, prevented me from
arriving at any great Success in an Art, which requires as much Coolness as the
most austere School of Philosophy.'

'Mr. Watson, with whom I now lived in the closest Amity, had unluckily the
former Failing to a very great Excess; so that instead of making a Fortune by
his Profession, as some others did, he was alternately rich and poor, and was
often obliged to surrender to his cooler Friends over a Bottle which they never
tasted, that Plunder that he had taken from Culls at the public Table.'

'However, we both made a Shift to pick up an uncomfortable Livelihood, and for
two Years I continued of the Calling, during which Time I tasted all the
Varieties of Fortune; sometimes flourishing in Affluence, and at others being
obliged to struggle with almost incredible Difficulties. Today wallowing in
Luxury, and Tomorrow reduced to the coarsest and most homely Fare. My fine
Clothes being often on my Back in the Evening,' and at the Pawnshop the next
Morning.

'One Night as I was returning Pennyless from the Gaming-table, I observed a
very great Disturbance, and a large Mob gathered together in the Street. As I
was in no Danger from Pick-pockets, I ventered into the Crowd, where upon
enquiry, I found that a Man had been robbed and very ill used by some Ruffians.
The wounded Man appeared very bloody, and seemed scarce able to support himself
on his Legs. As I had not therefore been deprived of my Humanity by my present
Life and Conversation, though they had left me very little of either Honesty or
Shame, I immediately offered my Assistance to the unhappy Person, who
thankfully accepted it, and putting himself under my Conduct, begged me to
convey him to some Tavern, where he might send for a Surgeon, being, as he
said, faint with Loss of Blood. He seemed indeed highly pleased at finding one
who appeared in the Dress of a Gentleman: For as to all the rest of the Company
present, their Outside was such that he could not wisely place any Confidence
in them.'

'I took the poor Man by the Arm, and led him to the Tavern where we kept our
Rendezvous, as it happened to be the nearest at Hand. A Surgeon happening
luckily to be in the House, immediately attended, and applied himself to
dressing the Wounds, which I had the Pleasure to hear were not likely to be
mortal.'

'The Surgeon having very expeditiously and dexterously finished his Business,
began to enquire in what Part of the Town the wounded Man lodged; who answered,
"That he was come to Town that very Morning; that his Horse was at an Inn in
Piccadilly, and that he had no other Lodging, and very little or no
Acquaintance in Town.'

'This Surgeon, whose Name I have forgot, though I remember it began with an R,
had the first Character in his Profession, and was Serjeant-Surgeon to the
King. He had moreover many good Qualities, and was a very generous,
good-natured Man, and ready to do any Service to his Fellow Creatures. He
offered his Patient the Use of his Chariot to carry him to his Inn, and at the
same Time whispered in his Ear, "That if he wanted any Money,' he would furnish
him.

'The poor Man was not now capable of returning Thanks for this generous Offer:
For having had his Eyes for some Time steadfastly on me, he threw himself back
in his Chair, crying, O, my Son! my Son! and then fainted away.

'Many of the People present imagined this Accident had happened through his
Loss of Blood; but I, who at the same Time began to recollect the Features of
my Father, was now confirmed in my Suspicion, and satisfied that it was he
himself who appeared before me. I presently ran to him, raised him in my Arms,
and kissed his cold Lips with the utmost Eagerness. Here I must draw a Curtain
over a Scene which I cannot describe: For though I did not lose my Being, as my
Father for a while did, my Senses were however so overpowered with Affright and
Surprise, that I am a Stranger to what past during some Minutes, and indeed
till my Father had again recovered from his Swoon, and I found myself in his
Arms, both tenderly embracing each other, while the Tears trickled apace down
the Cheeks of each of us.'

'Most of those present seemed affected by this Scene, which we, who might be
considered as the Actors in it, were desirous of removing from the Eyes of all
Spectators, as fast as we could; my Father therefore accepted the kind Offer of
the Surgeon's Chariot, and I attended him in it to his Inn.'

'When we were alone together, he gently upbraided me with having neglected to
write to him during so long a Time, but entirely omitted the Mention of that
Crime which had occasioned it. He then informed me of my Mother's Death, and
insisted on my returning Home with him, saying, That he had long suffered the
greatest Anxiety on my Account; that he knew not whether he had most feared my
Death or wished it; since he had so many more dreadful Apprenensions for me. At
last he said, a neighboring Gentleman, who had just recovered a Son from the
same Place, informed him where I was, and that to reclaim me from this Course
of Life, was the sole Cause of his Journey to London." 'He thanked Heaven he
had succeeded so far as to find me out by Means of an Accident which had like
to have proved fatal to him; and had the Pleasure to think he partly owed his
Preservation to my Humanity, with which he professed himself to be more
delighted than he should have been with my filial Piety, if I had known that
the Object of all my Care was my own Father.'

'Vice had not so depraved my Heart, as to excite in it an Insensibility of so
much paternal Affection, though so unworthily bestowed, I presently promised to
obey his Commands in my return Home with him as soon as he was able to travel,
which indeed he was in a very few Days, by the Assistance of that excellent
Surgeon who had undertaken his Cure.'

'The Day preceding my Father's Journey (before which Time I scarce ever left
him) I went to take my Leave of some of my most intimate Acquaintance,
particularly of Mr. Watson, who dissuaded me from burying myself, as he called
it, out of a simple Compliance with the fond Desires of a foolish ^old Fellow.
Such Solicitations, however, had no Effect, and I once more saw my own Home. My
Father now greatly solicited me to think of Marriage; but my Inclinations were
utterly averse to ^any such Thoughts. I had tasted of Love already, and perhaps
you know the extravagant Excesses of that most tender and most violent
Passion.' Here ^e old Gentleman paused, and looked earnestly at ^ones; whose
Countenance within a Minute's Space ^^splayed the Extremities of both red and
white. upon which the old Man, without making any Ob^^vations, renewed his
Narrative.

'Being now provided with all the Necessaries of Life, I betook myself once
again to Study, and that with a more inordinate Application than I had ever
done formerly. The Books which now employed my Time solely, were those, as well
ancient as modern, which treat of true Philosophy, a Word, which is by many
thought to be the Subject only of Farce and Ridicule. I now read over the Works
of Aristotle and Plato, with the rest of those inestimable Treasures which
ancient Greece has bequeathed to the World.

'These Authors, though they instructed me in no Science by which Men may
promise to themselves to acquire the least Riches, or worldly Power, taught me,
however, the Art of despising the highest Acquisitions of both. They elevate
the Mind, and steel and harden it against the capricious Invasions of Fortune.
They not only instruct in the Knowledge of Wisdom, but confirm Men in her
Habits, and demonstrate plainly, that this must be our Guide, if we propose
ever to arrive at the greatest worldly Happiness; or to defend ourselves with
any tolerable Security against the Misery which every where surrounds and
invests us.

'To this I added another Study, compared to which all the Philosophy taught by
the wisest Heathens is little better than a Dream, and is indeed as full of
Vanity as the silliest Jester ever pleased to represent it. This is that divine
Wisdom which is alone to be found in the Holy Scriptures: for they impart to us
the Knowledge and Assurance of Things much more worthy our Attention, than all
which this World can offer to our Acceptance. Of Things which Heaven itself
has condescended to reveal to us, and to the smallest Knowledge of which the
highest human Wit unassisted could never ascend. I began now to think all the
Time I had spent with the best Heathen Writers, was little more than Labor
lost: For however pleasant and delightful these Lessons may be, or however
adequate to the right Regulation of our Conduct with Respect to this World
only, yet when compared with the Glory revealed in Scripture, their highest
Documents will appear as trifling, and of as little Consequence as the Rules by
which Children regulate their Childish little Games and Pastime. True it is,
that Philosophy makes us wiser, but Christianity makes us better Men.
Philosophy elevates and steels the Mind, Christianity softens and sweetens it.
The Former makes us the Objects of human Admiration, the Latter of Divine Love.
That insures us a temporal, but this an eternal Happiness. -- But I am afraid I
tire you with my Rhapsody.'

'Not at all,' cries Partridge, 'Lud forbid we' should be tired with good
Things.

'I had spent,' continued the Stranger, 'about four Years in the most
delightful Manner to myself, totally given up to Contemplation, and entirely
unembarrassed with the Affairs of the World, when I lost the best of Fathers,
and one whom I so sincerely loved, that my Grief at his Loss exceeds all
Description. I now abandoned my Books, and gave myself up for a whole Month to
the Efforts of Melancholy and Despair. Time, however, the best Physician of the
Mind, at length brought me Relief.' Ay, ay, Tempus edax Rerum,' said Partridge.
'I then,' continued the Stranger, 'betook myself again to my former Studies,
which I may say perfected my Cure: For Philosophy and Religion may be called
the Exercises of the Mind, and when this is disordered they are as wholesome as
Exercise can be to a distempered Body. They do indeed produce similar Effects
with Exercise: For they strengthen and confirm the Mind; till' Man becomes, in
the noble Strain of Horace, 'Fortis, and in seipso totus teres atque rotundus,
'Externi ne quid valeat per laeve morari:
'In quem manca ruit semper Fortuna. -- Firm in himself, who on himself relies,
Polished and round, who runs his proper Course,
And breaks Misfortunes with superior Force.




Here Jones smiled at some Conceit which intruded itself into his Imagination*
but the Stranger, I believe, perceived it not, and proceeded thus.

'My Circumstances were now greatly altered by the Death of that best of Men:
For my Brother who was now become Master of the House, differed so widely from
me in his Inclinations, and our Pursuits in Life had been so very various, that
we were the worst of Company to each other; but what made our living together
still more disagreeble, was the little Harmony which could subsist between the
few who resorted to me, and the numerous Train of Sportsmen who often attended
my Brother from the Field to the Table: For such Fellows, besides the Noise and
Nonsense with which they persecute the Ears of sober Men, endeavor always to
attack them with Affront and Contempt. This was so much the Case, that neither
I myself, nor my Friends, could ever sit down to a Meal with them, without
being treated with Derision, because we were unacquainted with the Phrases of
Sportsmen. For men of true Learning, and almost universal Knowledge, always
compassionate the Ignorance of others: but Fellows who excel in some little,
low, contemptible Art, are always certain to despise those who are unacquainted
with that Art.'

'In short, we soon separated, and I went by the Advice of a Physician to drink
the Bath Waters: For my violent Affliction, added to a sedentary Life, have
thrown me into a kind of a paralytic Disorder, for which those Waters are
accounted an almost certain Cure. The second Day after my arrival, as I was
walking by the River, the Sun shone so intensely hot (though it was early in the
Year) that I retired to the Shelter of some Willows, and sat down by the
Riverside. Here I had not been seated long before I heard a Person on the
other Side the Willows, sighing and bemoaning himself bitterly. On a sudden,
having uttered a most impious Oath, he cried, "I am resolved to bear it no
longer." and directly threw himself into the Water. I immediately started, and
ran toward the Place, calling at the same Time as loudly as I could for
Assistance. An Angler happened luckily to be a fishing a little below me, though
some very high sedge had hid him from my Sight. He immediately came up, and
both of us together, not without some Hazard of our Lives, drew the Body to the
Shore. At first we perceived no Sign of Life remaining; but having held the
Body up by the Heels (for we soon had Assistance enough) it discharged a vast
Quantity of Water at the Mouth, and at length began to discover some Symptoms
of Breathing, and a little afterward to move both its' Hands and its Legs.

'An Apothecary, who happened to be present among others, advised that the
Body, which seemed now to have pretty well emptied itself of Water, and which
began to have many convulsive Motions, should be directly taken up, and carried
into a warm Bed. This was accordingly performed, the Apothecary and myself
attending.'

'As we were going toward an Inn, for we knew not the Man's Lodgings, luckily
a Woman met us, who after some violent Screaming, told us, that the Gentleman
lodged at her House.'

'When I had seen the Man safely deposited there, I left him to the Care of the
Apothecary, who, I suppose, used all the right Methods with him; for the next
Morning I heard he had perfectly recovered' his Senses.

'I then went to visit him, intending to search out as well as I could the
Cause of his having attempted so desperate an Act, and to prevent as far as I
was able, his pursuing such wicked Intentions for the future. I was no sooner
admitted into his Chamber, than we both instantly knew each other; for who
should this Person be, but my good Friend Mr. Watson! Here I will not trouble
you with what past at our first Interview: For I would avoid Prolixity as much
as possible.' 'Pray let us hear all,' cries Partridge, 'I want mightily to know
what brought him to Bath.'

'You shall hear every thing material,' answered the Stranger; and then
proceeded to relate what we shall proceed to write, after we have given a short
breathing Time to both ourselves and the Reader.

CHAP. XIV. In which the Man of the Hill concludes his History.
'MR. Watson,' continued the Stranger,' 'very freely acquainted me, that the
unhappy Situation of his Circumstances, occasioned by a Tide of Ill-Luck, had
in a Manner forced him to a Resolution of destroying himself.'

'I now began to argue very seriously with him, in Opposition to this
Heathenish, or indeed diabolical Principle of the Lawfulness of Self-Murder;
and said every Thing which occurred to me on the Subject; but to my great
Concern, it seemed to have very little Effect on him. He seemed not at all to
repent of what he had done, and gave me Reason to fear, he would soon make a
second Attempt of the like horrible kind.'

'When I had finished my Discourse, instead of endeavoring to answer my
Arguments, he looked me steadfastly in the Face, and with a Smile said, You are
strangely altered my good Friend, since I remember you. I question whether any
of our Bishops could make a better Argument against Suicide than you have
entertained me with, but unless you can find somebody who will lend me a cool
Hundred, I must either hang, or drown, or starve; and in my Opinion the last
Death is the most terrible of the three.'

'I answered him very gravely, that I was indeed altered since I had seen him
last. That I had found Leisure to look into my Follies, and to repent of them.
I then advised him to pursue the same Steps; and at last concluded with an
Assurance, that I myself would lend him a hundred Pound, if it would be of any
Service to his Affairs, and he would not put it into the Power of a Die to
deprive him of it.'

'Mr. Watson, who seemed almost composed in Slumber by the former Part of my
Discourse, was roused by the latter. He seized my Hand eagerly, gave me a
thousand Thanks, and declared I was a Friend indeed; adding, that he hoped I
had a better Opinion of him, than to imagine he had profited so little by
Experience, as to put any Confidence in those damned Dice, which had so often
deceived him. "No, no," cries he, "let me but once handsomely be set up again,
and if ever Fortune makes a broken Merchant of me afterward, I will forgive
her.'

'I very well understood the Language of setting up, and broken Merchant. I
therefore said to him with a very grave Face, Mr. Watson, you must endeavor to
find out some Business, or Employment, by which you may procure yourself a
Livelihood; and I promise you, could I see any probability of being repaid
hereafter, I would advance a much larger Sum than what you have mentioned, to
equip you in any fair and honorable Calling; but as to Gaming besides the
Baseness and wickedness of making it a Profession, you are really, to my own
Knowledge, unfit for it, and it will end in your certain Ruin.'

"Why now, that is strange," answered he, 'neither you nor any of my Friends,
would ever allow me to know any Thing of the Matter, and yet, I believe I am as
good a Hand at every Game as any of you all; and I heartily wish I was to play
with you only for your whole Fortune; I should desire no better Sport, and I
would let you name your Game into the Bargain; but come, my dear Boy, have you
the Hundred in your Pocket?

'I answered, I had only a Bill for 50l. which I delivered him, and promised to
bring him the rest next Morning; and after giving him a little more Avice,'
took my Leave.

'I was indeed better than my Word: For I returned to him that very Afternoon.
When I entered the Room, I found him sitting up in his Bed at Cards with a
notorious Gamester. This Sight, you will imagine, shocked me not a little; to
which I may add the Mortification of seeing my Bill delivered by him to his
Antagonist, and thirty Guineas only given in Exchange for it.'

'The other Gamester presently quitted the Room, and then Watson declared he
was ashamed to see me; but, says he, I find Luck runs so damnably against me,
that I will resolve to leave off Play for ever. I have thought of the kind
Proposal you made me ever since, and I promise you there shall be no Fault in
me, if I do not put it in Execution.'

'Though I had no great Faith in his Promises, I produced him the Remainder of
the hundred in Consequence of my own; for which he gave me a Note, which was
all I ever expected to see in Return for my Money.'

'We were prevented from any further Discourse at present, by the Arrival of
the Apothecary, who with much Joy in his Countenance, and without even asking
his Patient how he did, proclaimed there was great News arrived in a Letter to
himself, which he said would shortly be public, "that the Duke of Monmouth was
landed in the West with a vast Army of Dutch, and that another vast Fleet
hovered over the Coast of Norfolk, and was to make a Descent there, in order to
favor the Duke's Enterprise with a Diversion on that Side.'

'This Apothecary was one of the greatest Politicians of his Time. He was more
delighted with the most paultry Packet, than with the best Patient; and the
highest Joy he was capable of, he received from having a Piece of News in his
Possession an Hour or two sooner than any other Person in the Town. His
Advices, however, were seldom authentic; for he would swallow almost any thing
as a Truth, a' Humor which many made use to impose upon him.

'Thus it happened with what he at present communicated; for it was known
within a short Time afterward, that the Duke was really landed; but that his
Army consisted only of a few Attendants; and as to the Diversion in Norfolk, it
was entirely false.'

'The Apothecary staid no longer in the Room, than while he acquainted us with
his News; and then, without saying a Syllable to his Patient on any other
Subject, departed to spread his Advices all over the Town.'

'Events of this Nature in the Public are generally apt to eclipse all private
Concerns. Our Discourse, therefore, now became entirely political. For my own
Part, I had been for some Time very seriously affected with the Danger to which
the Protestant Religion was so visibly exposed, under a Popish Prince; and
thought the Apprehension of it alone sufficient to justify that Insurrection:
For no real Security can ever be found against the persecuting Spirit of
Popery, when armed with Power, except the depriving it of that Power, as woeful
Experience presently showed. You know how King James behaved after getting the
better of this Attempt; how little he valued either his Royal Word, or
Coronation Oath, or the Liberties and Rights of his People. But all had not the
Sense to foresee this at first: and therefore the Duke of Monmouth was weakly
supported; yet all could feel when the Evil came upon them; and therefore all
united, at last, to drive out that King, against whose Exclusion a great Party
among us had so warmly contended, during the Reign of his Brother, and for whom
they now fought with such Zeal and Affection.'

'What you say,' interrupted Jones, 'is very true; and it has often struck me,
as the most wonderful thing I ever read of in History, that so soon after this
convincing Experience, which brought out whole Nation to join so unanimously in
expelling King James, for the Preservation of our Religion and Liberties, there
should be a Party among us mad enough to desire the placing his Family again on
the Throne.' You are not in earnest!' answered the old Man: 'there can be no
such Party. As bad an Opinion as I have of Mankind, I cannot believe them
infatuated to such a Degree! There may be some hotheaded Papists led by their
Priests to engage in this desperate Cause, and think it a Holy War; but that
Protestants, that Members of the Church of England should be such Apostates,
such Felos de se, I cannot believe it; no, no, young Man, unacquainted as I am
with what has past in the World for these last thirty Years, I cannot be so
imposed upon as to credit so foolish a Tale: But I see you have a Mind to sport
with my Ignorance.' Can it be possible,' replied Jones, 'that you have lived so
much out of the World as not to know, that during that Time there have been two
Rebellions in favor of the Son of King James, one of which is now actually
raging in the very Heart of this Kingdom? At these Words the old Gentleman
started up, and, in a most solemn Tone of Voice conjured Jones by his Maker to
tell him, if what he said was really true: Which the other as solemnly
affirming, he walked several Turns about the Room, in a profound Silence, then
cried, then laughed, and at last, fell down on his Knees, and blessed God, in a
loud Thanksgiving-Prayer, for having delivered him from all Society with Human
Nature, which could be capable of such monstrous Extravagances. After which
being reminded by Jones, that he had broke off his' Story, he resumed it again,
in this Manner.

'As Mankind, in the Days I was speaking of, was not yet arrived to that Pitch
of Madness which I find they are capable of now, and which, to be sure, I have
only escaped by living alone, and at a Distance from the Contagion, there was a
considerable Rising in favor of Monmouth, and my Principles strongly inclining
me to take the same Part, I determined to join him, and Mr. Watson, from
different Motives concurring in the same Resolution, (for the Spirit of a
Gamester will carry a Man as far upon such an Occasion as the Spirit of
Patriotism,) we soon provided ourselves with all Necessaries, and went to the
Duke at Bridgewater. The unfortunate Event of this Enterprise you are, I
conclude, as well acquainted with as myself. I escaped together with Mr.
Watson, from the Battle at Sedgemore, in which Action I received a slight
Wound. We rode near forty Miles together on the Exeter Road, and then
abandoning our Horses, scrambled as well as we could through the Fields and
Bye-Roads, till we arrived at a little wild Hut on a Common, where a poor old
Woman took all the Care of us she could, and dressed my Wound with Salve, which
quickly healed it.'

'Pray, Sir, where was the Wound,' says Partridge. The Stranger satisfied him
it was in his Arm, and then continued his Narrative. 'Here, Sir,' said he, 'Mr
Watson left me the next Morning, in order as he pretended, to get us some
Provision from the Town of Cullumpton; but -- can I relate it? or can you
believe it? -- This Mr. Watson, this Friend, this base, barbarous, treacherous
Villain, betrayed me to a Party of Horse belonging to King James, and, at his
Return, delivered me into their Hands.'

'The Soldiers, being six in Number, had now seized me, and were conducting me
to Taunton Goal; but neither my present Situation, nor the Apprehensions of
what might happen to me, were half so irksome to my Mind, as the Company of my
false Friend, who, having surrendered himself, was likewise considered as a
Prisoner, though he was better treated, as being to make his Peace at my Expense.
He at first endeavored to excuse his Treachery; but when he received nothing
but Scorn and Upbraiding from me, he soon changed his Note, abused me as the
most atrocious and malicious Rebel, and laid all his own Guilt to my Charge,
who, as he declared, had solicited, and even threatened him, to make him take
up Arms against his gracious, as well as lawful, Sovereign.'

'This false Evidence, (for in Reality, he had been much the forwarder of the
two) stung me to the Quick, and raised an Indignation scarce conceivable by
those who have not felt it. However, Fortune a^ length, took Pity on me; for as
we were got a little beyond Wellington, in a narrow Lane, my Guards received a
false Alarm, that near fifty of the Enemy were at hand, upon which they shifted
for themselves, and left me and my Betrayer to do the same. That Villain
immediately ran from me, and I am glad he did, or I should have certainly
endeavored though I had no Arms, to have executed Vengeanc^ on his Baseness.'

'I was now once more at Liberty, and immediately withdrawing from the Highway
into the Fields, ^^ traveled on, scarce knowing which Way I went, and making
it my chief Care to avoid all public Roads, and all Towns, nay, even the most
homely Houses; for I imagined every hu+ man Creature whom I saw, desirous of
betraying' me.

'At last, after rambling several Days about the Country, during which the
Fields afforded me the same Bed, and the same Food, which Nature bestows on our
Savage Brothers of the Creation, I at length arrived at this Place, where the
Solitude and Wildness of the Country invited me to fix my Abode. The first
Person with whom I took up my Habitation was the Mother of this old Woman, with
whom I remained concealed, till the News of the glorious Revolution put an End
to all my Apprehensions of Danger, and gave me an Opportunity of once more
visiting my own Home, and of enquiring a little into my Affairs, which I soon
settled as agreeably to my Brother as to myself; having resigned every thing to
him, for which he paid me the Sum of a thousand Pounds, and settled on me an
Annuity for Life.'

'His Behavior in this last Instance, as in all others, was selfish and
ungenerous. I could not look on him as my Friend, nor indeed did he desire that
I should; so I presently took my Leave of him, as well as of my other
Acquaintance; and from that Day to this my History is little better than a
Blank.'

'And is it possible, Sir, said Jones, 'that you can have resided here from
that Day to this?' 'O no, Sir,' answered the Gentleman, 'I have been a great
Traveller, and there are few Parts of Europe with which I am not acquainted.'
'I have not, Sir, cried Jones, 'the Assurance to ask it of you now. Indeed it
would be cruel, after so much Breath as you have already spent. But you will
give me Leave to wish for some further Opportunity of hearing the excellent
Observations, which a Man of your Sense and Knowledge of the World must have
made in so long a Course of Travels.' Indeed, young Gentleman,' answered the
Stranger, 'I will endeavor to satisfy your Curiosity on this Head likewise, as
far as I am able.' Jones attempted fresh Apologies, but was prevented; and
while he and Partridge sat with greedy and impatient Ears, the Stranger
proceeded as in the next Chapter.

CHAP. XV. A brief History of Europe. And a curious Discourse between Mr. Jones
and the Man of the Hill.
IN Italy the Landlords are very silent. In France they are more talkative, but
yet civil. In Germany and Holland they are generally very impertinent. And as
for their Honesty, I believe it is pretty equal in all those Countries. The
Laquais a Louange are sure to lose no Opportunity of cheating you: And as for
the Postilions, I think they are pretty much alike all the World over. These,
Sir, are the Observations on Men which I made in my Travels, for these were the
only Men I ever conversed with. My Design when I went abroad, was to divert
myself by seeing the wondrous Variety of Prospects, Beasts, Birds, Fishes,
Insects, and Vegetables, with which God has been pleased to enrich the several
Parts of this Globe. A Variety, which as it must give great Pleasure to a
contemplative Beholder, so does it admirably display the Power and Wisdom and
Goodness of the Creator. Indeed, to say the Truth, there is but one Work in his
whole Creation that does him any Dishonor, and with that I have long since
avoided' holding any Conversation.

'You will pardon me,' cries Jones, 'but I have always imagined, that there is
in this very Work you mention, as great Variety as in all the rest; for besides
the Difference of Inclination, Customs and Climates have, I am told, introduced
the utmost Diversity into Human Nature.' 'Very little indeed,' answered the
other; 'those who travel in order to acquaint themselves with the different
Manners of Men, might spare themselves much Pains, by going to a Carnival at
Venice; for there they will see at once all which they can discover in the
several Parts of Europe. The same Hypocrisy, the same Fraud; in short, the same
Follies and Vices, dressed in different Habits. In Spain these are equipped
with much Gravity; and in Italy, with vast Splendour. In France, a Knave is
dressed like a Fop; and in the Northern Countries like a Sloven. But human
Nature is every where the same, every where the Object of Detestation and
Scorn.'

'As for my own Part, I past through all these Nations, as you perhaps may have
done through a Crowd at a Show, jostling to get by them, holding my Nose with
one Hand, and defending my Pockets with the other, without speaking a Word to
any of them, while I was pressing on to see what I wanted to see, which,
however entertaining it might be in itself, scarce made me Amends for the
Trouble the Company gave me.'

'Did not you find some of the Nations among which you traveled, less
troublesome to you than others? said Jones.' 'O yes,' replied the old Man, the
Turks were much more tolerable to me than the Christians. For they are Men of
profound Taciturnity, and never disturb a Stranger with Questions. Now and then
indeed they bestow a short Curse upon him, or spit in his Face as he walks the
Streets, but then they have done with him, and a Man may live an Age in their
Country without hearing a Dozen Words from them. But of all the People I ever
saw, Heaven defend me from the French. With their damned Prate and Civilities,
and doing the Honor of their Nation to Strangers, (as they are pleased to call
it) but indeed setting forth their own Vanity; they are so troublesome, that I
had infinitely rather pass my Life with the Hottentots, than set my Foot in
Paris again. They are a nasty People, but their Nastiness is mostly without,
whereas in France, and some other Nations that I will not name, it is all within,
and makes them stink much more to my Reason than that of Hottentots does to my
Nose.'

'Thus, Sir, I have ended the History of my Life; for as to all that Series of
Years, during which I have lived retired here, it affords no Variety to
entertain you, and may be almost considered as one Day. The Retirement has been
so complete, that I could hardly have enjoyed a more absolute Solitude in the
Deserts of the Thebais, than here in the midst of this populous Kingdom. As I
have no Estate, I am plagued with no Tenants or Stewards; my Annuity is paid me
pretty regularly, as indeed it ought to be, for it is much less than what I
might have expected, in Return for what I gave up. Visits I admit none, and the
old Woman who keeps my House knows, that her Place entirely depends upon her
saving me all the Trouble of buying the Things that I want, keeping off all
Solicitation or Business from me, and holding her Tongue whenever I am within
hearing. As my Walks are all by Night, I am pretty secure in this wild, and
unfrequented Place from meeting any Company. Some few Persons I have met by
Chance, and sent them Home heartily frighted, as from the Oddness of my Dress
and Figure they took me for a Ghost or a Hobgoblin. But what has happened to
Night shows, that even here I cannot be safe from the Villainy of Men; for
without your Assistance I had not only been robbed, but very probably
murdered.'

Jones thanked the Stranger for the trouble he had taken in relating his Story,
and then expressed some Wonder how he could possibly endure a Life of such
Solitude; 'in which,' says he, 'you may well complain of the Want of Variety.
Indeed I am astonished how you have filled up, or rather killed, so much of
your Time.'

'I am not at all surprised,' answered the other, that to one whose Affections
and Thoughts are fixed on the World, my Hours should appear to have wanted
Employment in this Place; but there is one single Act, for which the whole Life
of Man is infinitely too short. What Time can suffice for the Contemplation and
Worship of that glorious, immortal, and eternal Being, among the Works of whose
stupendous Creation, not only this Globe, but even those numberless Luminaries
which we may here behold spangling all the Sky, though they should many of them
be Suns lighting different Systems of Worlds, may possibly appear but as a few
Atoms, opposed to the whole Earth which we inhabit? Can a Man who, by Divine
Meditations, is admitted, as it were, into the Conversation of this ineffable,
incomprehensible Majesty, think Days, or Years, or Ages, too long, for the
Continuance of so ravishing an Honor? Shall the trifling Amusements, the
palling Pleasures, the silly Business of the World, roll away our Hours too
swiftly from us; and shall the Pace of Time seem sluggish to a Mind exercised
in Studies so high, so important, and so glorious! As no Time is sufficient, so
no Place is improper for this great Concern. On what Object can we cast our
Eyes, which may not inspire us with Ideas of his Power, of his Wisdom, and of
his Goodness? It is not necessary, that the rising Sun should dart his fiery
Glories over the Eastern Horizon; nor that the boisterous Winds should rush
from their Caverns, and shake the lofty Forest; nor that the opening Clouds
should pour their Deluges on the Plains: It is not necessary, I say, that any
of these should proclaim his Majesty; there is not an Insect, not a Vegetable,
of so low an Order in the Creation, as not to be honored with bearing Marks of
the Attributes of its great Creator; Marks not only of his Power, but of his
Wisdom and Goodness. Man alone, the King of this Globe, the last and greatest
Work of the Supreme Being, below the Sun; Man alone has basely dishonored his
own Nature, and by Dishonesty, Cruelty, Ingratitude, and Treachery, has called
his Maker's Goodness in Question, by puzzling us to account how a benevolent
Being should form so foolish, and so vile an Animal. Yet this is the Being from
whose Conversation you think, I suppose, that I have been unfortunately
restrained; and without whose blessed Society, Life, in your Opinion, must be
tedious and insipid.'

'In the former Part of what you said,' replied Jones, 'I most heartily and
readily concur; but I believe, as well as hope, that the Abhorrence which you
express for Mankind, in the Conclusion, is much too general. Indeed you here
fall into an Error, which, in my little Experience, I have observed to be a
very common one, by taking the Character of Mankind from the worst and basest
among them; whereas indeed, as an excellent Writer observes, nothing should be
esteemed as characteristical of a Species, but what is to be found among the
best and most perfect Individuals of that species. This Error, I believe, is
generally committed by those who, from Want of proper Caution in the Choice of
their Friends and Acquaintance, have suffered injuries from bad and worthless
Men; two or three Instances of which are very unjustly charged on all Human
Nature.'

'I think I had Experience enough of it,' answered he other. 'My first
Mistress, and my first Friend, betrayed me in the basest Manner, and in Matters
which threatened to be of the worst of Consequences, even to bring me to a
shameful Death.'

'But you will pardon me,' cries Jones, 'if I desire you to reflect who that
Mistress, and who that Friend were. What better, my good Sir, could be expected
in Love derived from the Stews, or in Friendship first produced and nourished
at the Gaming-Table! To take the Characters of Women from the former Instance,
or of Men from the latter, would be as unjust as to assert, that Air is
anauseous an unwholesome Element, because we find it so in a Jakes. I have
lived but a short Time in the World, and yet have known Men worthy of the
highest Friendship, and Women of the highest Love.'

'Alas! young Man,' answered the Stranger; 'you have lived, you confess, but a
very short Time in the World; I was somewhat older than you when I was of the
same Opinion.'

'You might have remained so still,' replies Jones, 'if you had not been
unfortunate, I will venture to say incautious in the placing your Affections.
If there was indeed much more Wickedness in the World than there is, it would
not prove such general Assertions against human Nature, since much of this
arrives by mere Accident, and many a Man who commits Evil is not totally bad
and corrupt in his Heart. In Truth, none seem to have any Title to assert Human
Nature to be necessarily and universally evil, but those whose own Minds afford
them one Instance of this natural Depravity; which is not, I am convinced, your
Case.'

'And such,' said the Stranger, 'will be always the most backward to assert any
such thing. Knaves will no more endeavor to persuade us of the Baseness of
Mankind, than a Highwayman will inform you that there are Thieves on the Road.
This would indeed be a Method to put you on your Guard, and to defeat their own
Purposes. For which Reason, though Knaves, as I remember, are very apt to abuse
particular Persons; yet they never cast any Reflection on Human Nature in
general.' The old Gentleman spoke this so warmly, that as Jones despaired of
making a Convert, and was unwilling to offend, he returned no Answer.

The Day now began to send forth its first Streams of Light, when Jones made an
Apology to the Stranger for his having staid so long, and perhaps having
detained him from his Rest. The Stranger answered, 'He never wanted Rest less
than at present; for that Day and Night were indifferent Seasons to him, and
that he commonly made use of the former for the Time of his Repose, and of the
latter for his Walks and Lucubrations. However,' said he, 'it is now a most
lovely Morning, and if you can bear any longer to be without your own Rest or
Food, I will gladly entertain you with the Sight of some very fine Prospects,
which I believe you have not yet seen.'

Jones very readily embraced this Offer, and they immediately set forward
together from the Cottage. As for Partridge, he had fallen into a profound
Repose, just as the Stranger had finished his Story; for his Curiosity was
satisfied, and the subsequent Discourse was not forcible enough in its
Operation to conjure down the Charms of Sleep. Jones therefore left him to
enjoy his Nap; and as the Reader may perhaps be, at this Season, glad of the
same Favor, we will here put an End to the Eighth Book of our History.

THE HISTORY OF A FOUNDLING.
BOOK IX. Containing twelve Hours.
CHAP. I. Of those who lawfully may, and of those who may not write such
Histories as this.
AMONG other good Uses for which I have thought proper to institute these
several introductory Chapters, I have considered them as a Kind of Mark or
Stamp, which may hereafter enable a very indifferent Reader to distinguish,
what is true and genuine in this historic kind of Writing, from what is false
and counterfeit. Indeed it seems likely that some such Mark may shortly become
necessary, since the favorable Reception which two or three Authors have
lately procured for their Works of this Nature from the Public, will probably
serve as an Encroachment to many others to undertake the like. Thus a Swarm of
foolish Novels, and monstrous Romances will be produced, either to the great
impoverishing of Booksellers, or to the great Loss of Time, and Depravation of
Morals in the Reader; nay, often to the spreading of Scandal and Calumny, and
to the Prejudice of the Characters of many worthy and honest People.

I question not but the ingenious Author of the Spectator was principally
induced to perfix Greek and Latin Mottos to every Paper from the same
Consideration of guarding against the Pursuit of those Scribblers, who, having
no Talents of a Writer but what is taught by the Writing-master, are yet no
wise afraid nor more ashamed to assume the same Titles with the greatest
Genius, than their good Brother in the Fable was of braying in the Lion's Skin.

By the Device therefore of his Motto, it became impracticable for any Man to
presume to imitate the Spectators, without understanding at least one Sentence
in the learned Languages. In the same Manner I have now secured myself from the
Imitation of those who are utterly incapable of any Degree of Reflection, and
whose Learning is not equal to an Essay.

I would not here be understood to insinuate, that the greatest Merit of such
historical Productions can ever lie in these introductory Chapters; but, in
Fact, those Parts which contain mere Narrative only, afford much more
Encouragement to the Pen of an Imitator, than those which are composed of
Observation and Reflection. Here I mean such Imitators as Row was of
Shakespeare, or as Horace hints some of the the Romans were of Cato, by bare
Feet and sour Faces.

To invent good Stories, and to tell them well, are possibly very rare Talents,
and yet I have observed few Persons who have scrupled to aim at both; and if we
examine the Romances and Novels with which the world abounds, I think we may
fairly conclude that most of the Authors would not have attempted to show their
Teeth (if the Expression may be allowed me) in any other Way of Writing; nor
could indeed have strung together a dozen Sentences on any other Subject
whatever. Scribimus indocti doctique passim -- Each desperate. Blockhead dares
to write,
Verse is the Trade of every living Wight.
FRANCIS.


, may be more truly said of the Historian and Biographer, than of any other
Species of Writing; For all the Arts and Sciences (even Criticism itself)
^equire some little Degree of Learning and Know^ege. Poetry indeed may perhaps
be thought an Ex^eption; but then it demands Numbers, or something ^ike
Numbers; whereas to the Composition of No^els and Romances, nothing is
necessary but Paper, Pens and Ink, with the manual Capacity of using them.
This, I conceive, their Productions show to be the Opinion of the Authors
themselves; and this must be the Opinion of their Readers, if indeed there be
any such.

Hence we are to derive that universal Contempt, which the World, who always
denominate the Whole from the Majority, have cast on all historical Writers,
who do not draw their Materials from Records. And it is the Apprehension of
this Contempt, that ^ath made us so cautiously avoid the Term Romance, ^ Name
with which we might otherwise have been well enough contented. Though as we
have good Authority for all our Characters, no less indeed than ^oomsday Book,
or the vast authentic Book of Nature, as is elsewhere hinted, our Labors have
sufficient Title to the Name of History. Certainly they de^erve some
Distinction from those Works, which one of he wittiest of Men regarded only as
proceeding from a Pruritus, or indeed rather from a Looseness of the Brain.

But besides the Dishonor which is thus cast on one of the most useful as well
as entertaining of all Kinds of Writing, there is just Reason to apprehend,
that ^y encouraging such Authors, we shall propagate much Dishonuur of another
Kind; I mean to the Characters of many good and valuable Members of Society:
For the dullest Writers, no more than the ^ullest Companions, are always
inoffensive. They ^ave both enough of Language to be indecent and abusive. And
surely if the Opinion just above cited be true, we cannot wonder, that Works so
nastily derived should be nasty themselves, or have a Tendency to make others
so.

To prevent therefore for the future, such intemperate Abuses of Leisure, of
Letters, and of the Liberty of the Press, especially as the World seems a^
present to be more than usually threatened with them I shall here venture to
mention some Qualifications every one of which are in a pretty high Degree
necessary to this Order of Historians.

The first is Genius, without a rich Vein of which no Study, says Horace, can
avail us. By Genius would understand that Power, or rather those Power of the
Mind, which are capable of penetrating into all Things within our Reach and
Knowledge, and o^ distinguishing their essential Differences. These are no
other than Invention and Judgment; and they are both called by the collective
Name of Genius, as they are o^ those Gifts of Nature which we bring with us
into the World. Concerning each of which many seem to have fallen into very
great Errors: For by Invention, I believe, is generally understood a creative
Faculty; which would indeed prove most Romance-Writers to have the highest
Pretensions to it; whereas by Invention is really meant no more, (and so the
Word signifies than Discovery, or finding out; or to explain it a^ large, a
quick and sagacious Penetration into the tru^ Essence of all the Objects of our
Contemplation This, I think, can rarely exist without the Concomi^tancy of
Judgment: For how we can be said to have discovered the true Essence of two
Things, without discerning their Difference, seems to me hard to conceive; now
this last is the undisputed Province of Judgment, and yet some few Men of Wit
have agree^ with all the dull Fellows in the World, in representing these two
to have been seldom or never the Property of one and the same Person.

But though they should be so, they are not sufficient ^r our Purpose without a
good Share of Learning; ^r which I could again cite the Authority of Horace,
and of many others, if any was necessary to prove that Tools are of no Service
to a Workman, when ^hey are not sharpened by Art, or when he wants ^ules to
direct him in his Work, or has no Matter ^^ work upon. All these Uses are
supplied by Learning: For Nature can only furnish us with Capacity, ^^, as I
have chose to illustrate it, with the Tools ^f our Profession; Learning must
fit them for Use, must direct them in it; and lastly, must contribute, ^art at
least, of the Materials. A competent Know^edge of History and of the Belles
Letters, is here ab^olutely necessary; and without this Share of Know^edge at
least, to affect the Character of an Historian, ^ as vain as to endeavor at
building a House without Timber or Mortar, or Brick or Stone. Homer and Milton,
who, though they added the Ornament of Numbers to their Works, were both
Historians of our Order, were Masters of all the Learning of their Times.

Again, there is another Sort of Knowledge beyond ^e Power of Learning to
bestow, and this is to be ^ad by Conversation. So necessary is this to the
understanding the Characters of Men, that none are more ^gnorant of them than
those learned Pedants, whose ^ives have been entirely consumed in Colleges, and
among Books: For however exquisitely Human Na^^re may have been described by
Writers, the true ^ractical System can only be learnt in the World. ^ndeed the
like happens in every other Kind of Know^^dge. Neither Physic, nor Law, are to
be practi^ally known from Books. Nay, the Farmer, the ^lanter, the Gardener,
must perfect by Experience what he has acquired the Rudiments of by Reading.
How accurately soever the ingenious Mr. Miller may ^ave described the Plant, he
himself would advise his ^isciple to see it in the Garden. As we must perceive,
that after the nicest strokes of a Shakespeare, or Johnson, of a Wycherly, or an
Otway, some To^ches of Nature will escape the Reader, which the judicious
Action of a Garrick, of a Cibber, or a Cli^^ There is a peculiar Propriety in
mentioning this gr^^^ Actor, and these two most justly celebrated Actresses in
t^^ Place; as they have all formed themselves on the Study Nature only; and not
on the Imitation of their Precessors. Hence they have been able to excel all
who h^^ gone before them; a degree of Merit which the serv^ Herd of Imitators
can never possibly arrive at.
, can convey to him; so on the real Stage, the Character shows himself in a
stronger, and bold^ Light, than he can be described. And if this be the Case in
those fine and nervous Descriptions, which great Authors themselves have taken
from Life, ho^ much more strongly will it hold when the Writer him self takes
his Lines not from Nature, but from Book Such Characters are only the faint
Copy of a Copy and can have neither the Justness nor Spirit of a Original.

Now this Conversation in our Historian must universal, that is, with all Ranks
and Degrees of Me^ For the Knowledge of what is called High-Lif^ will not
instruct him in low, nor e converso, will ^^ being acquainted with the inferior
Part of Mankin^ teach him the Manners of the superior. And thoug^ it may be
thought that the Knowledge of either m^ sufficiently enable him to describe at
least that in which he has been conversant; yet he will even here ^^ greatly
short of Perfection; for the Follies of eith^^ Rank do in reality illustrate
each other. For Instance, t^^ Affectation of High-life appears more glaring and
^ diculous from the Simplicity of the Low; and ag^ the rudeness and barbarity
of this latter, strikes w^ much stronger Ideas of Absurdity, when contras^
with, and opposed to the Politeness which contro^ the former. Besides to say
the Truth, the Mann^^ of our Historian will be improved by both these
Conversations: For in the one he will easily find Examples of Plainness,
Honesty, and Sincerity; in the other of Refinement, Elegance, and a Liberality
of Spirit; which last Quality I myself have scarce ever ^een in Men of low
Birth and Education.

Nor will all the Qualities I have hitherto given my Historian avail him,
unless he have what is generally meant by a good Heart, and be capable of
feeling. The Author who will make me weep, says Horace, must first weep
himself. In reality, no Man ^an paint a Distress well, which he does not feel
while ^e is painting it; nor do I doubt, but that the most ^athetic and
affecting Scenes have been writ with Tears. In the same Manner it is with the
Ridiculous. ^ am convinced I never make my Reader laugh hear^ly, but where I
have laughed before him, unless it should happen at any Time, that instead of
laughing with me, he should be inclined to laugh at me. Perhaps this may have
been the Case at some Pas^ages in this Chapter, from which Apprehensions I will
here put an End to it.

CHAP. II. Containing a very surprising Adventure indeed, which Mr. Jones met
with in his Walk with the Man of the Hill.
AURORA now first opened her Casement, anglice, the Day began to break, when
Jones walked ^orth in Company with the Stranger, and mounted Mazard Hill; of
which they had no sooner gained ^he Summit, than one of the most noble
Prospects in ^he World presented itself to their View, and which ^e would
likewise present to the Reader; but for two Reasons. First, We despair of
making those who ^ave seen this Prospect, admire our Description. Secondly, We
very much doubt whether those, who have ^ot seen it, would understand it.

Jones stood for some Minutes fixed in one Posture, and directing his Eyes
toward the South; upon which the old Gentleman asked, What he was looking at
with so much Attention? 'Alas, Sir,' answered he, with a Sigh, 'I was
endeavoring to trace out my own Journey hither. Good Heavens! what a Distance
is Gloucester from us! What a vast Tract of Land must be between me and my own
Home.' Ay, ay, young Gentleman,' cries the other, 'and, by your Sighing, from
what you love better than your own Home, or I am mistaken. I perceive now the
Object of your Contemplation is not within your Sight, and yet I fancy you have
a Pleasure in looking that Way.' Jones answered with a Smile, I find, old
Friend, you have not yet forgot the Sensations of your Youth. -- I own my
Thoughts were employed as you have guessed.'

They now walked to that Part of the Hill which looks to the North West, and
which hangs over a vas^ and extensive Wood. Here they were no sooner arrived,
than they heard at a Distance the most violent Skreams of a Woman, proceeding
from the Wood below them. Jones listened a Moment, and then, without saying a
Word to his Companion (for indeed the Occasion seemed sufficiently pressing)
ran, or rather slid, down the Hill, and without the least Apprehensions or
Concern for his own Safety, made directly to the Thicket whence the Sound had
issued.

He had not entered far into the Wood before he beheld a most shocking Sight
indeed, a Woman strip half naked, under the Hands of a Ruffian, who had put his
Garter round her Neck, and was endeavoring to draw her up to a Tree. Jones
asked no Questions at this Interval; but fell instantly upon the Villian, and
made such good Use of his trusty Oaken Stick^ that he laid him sprawling on the
Ground, before h^ could defend himself, indeed almost before he knew he was
attacked; nor did he cease the Prosecution o^ his Blows, till the Woman herself
begged him to forbear, saying, She believed he had sufficiently done his
Business.

The poor Wretch then fell upon her Knees to Jones, and gave him a thousand
Thanks for her De^iverance: He presently lifted her up, and told her ^e was
highly pleased with the extraordinary Acci^ent which had sent him thither for
her Relief, where ^t was so improbable she should find any; adding, that Heaven
seemed to have designed him as the hap^y Instrument of her Protection. 'Nay,'
answer^d she, 'I could almost conceive you to be some good Angel; and to say
the Truth, you look more like an Angel than a Man in my Eye.' Indeed he was a
charming Figure, and if a very fine Person, and a most comely Set of Features,
adorned with Youth, Health, Strength, Freshness, Spirit and Good Nature, can
make a Man resemble an Angel, he certainly had that Resemblance.

The redeemed Captive had not altogether so much of the human-angelic Species;
she seemed to be, at ^east, of the middle Age, nor had her Face much Ap^earance
of Beauty; but her Clothes being torn from ^ll the upper Part of the Body, her
Breasts, which were well formed, and extremely white, attracted ^he Eyes of her
Deliverer, and for a few Moments ^hey stood silent, and gazing at each other;
till the Ruffian on the Ground beginning to move, Jones ^ook the Garter which
had been intended for another ^urpose, and bound both his Hands behind him. And
^ow, on contemplating his Face, he discovered, great^y to his Surprise, and
perhaps not a little to his Satisfaction, this very Person to be no other than
En^gn Northerton. Nor had the Ensign forgotten his for^^er Antagonist, whom he
knew the Moment he came ^o himself. His Surprise was equal to that of Jones;
^ut I conceive his Pleasure was rather less on this Occasion.

Jones helped Northerton upon his Legs, and then looking him steadfastly in the
Face, 'I fancy, Sir,' said he, 'you did not expect to meet me any more in this
World, and I confess I had as little Expectation to find you here. However,
Fortune, I see, has brought us once more together, and has given me
Satisfaction for the Injury I have received, even without my own Knowledge.'

'It is very much like a Man of Honor indeed,' answered Northerton, 'to take
Satisfaction by knocking a Man down behind his Back. Neither am I capable of
giving you Satisfaction here, as I have no Sword; but if you dare behave like a
Gentleman, let us go where I can furnish myself with one, and I will do by you
as a Man of Honor ought.'

'Doth it become such a Villain as you are,' cries Jones, 'to contaminate the
Name of Honor by assuming it? But I shall waste no Time in Discourse with you
-- Justice requires Satisfaction of you now, and shall have it.' Then turning
to the Woman, he asked her, if she was near her Home, or if not, whether she
was acquainted with any House in the Neighborhood, where she might procure
herself some decent Clothes, in order to proceed to a Justice of the Peace.

She answered, She was an entire Stranger in that Part of the World. Jones then
recollecting himself, said he had a Friend near, who would direct them; indeed
he wondered at his not following; but, in Fact, the Good Man of the Hill, when
our Hero departed, sat himself down on the Brow, where, though he had a Gun in
his Hand, he with great Patience and Unconcern, had attended the Issue.

Jones then stepping without the Wood, perceived the old Man sitting as we have
just described him; he presently exerted his utmost Agility, and with
surprising Expedition ascended the Hill.

The old Man advised him to carry the Woman to Upton, which, he said, was the
nearest Town, and there he would be sure of furnishing her with all manner of
Conveniences. Jones having received his Direction to the Place, took his Leave
of the Man of the Hill, and desiring him to direct Partridge the same Way,
returned hastily to the Wood.

Our Hero, at his Departure to make this Enquiry of his Friend, had
considered, that as the Ruffian's Hands were tied behind him, he was incapable
of executing any wicked Purposes on the poor Woman. Besides, he knew he should
not be beyond the Reach of her Voice, and could return soon enough to prevent
any Mischief. He had moreover declared to the Villain, that if he attempted the
least Insult, he would be himself immediately the Executioner of Vengeance on
him. But Jones unluckily forgot that though the Hands of Northerton were tied,
his Legs were at Liberty; nor did he lay the least Injunction on the Prisoner,
that he should not make what use of these he pleased. Northerton therefore
having given no Parole of that Kind, thought he might, without any Breach of
Honor, depart, not being obliged, as he imagined, by any Rules, to wait for a
formal Discharge. He therefore took up his Legs, which were at Liberty, and
walked off through the Wood, which favored his Retreat; nor did the Woman, whose
Eyes were perhaps rather turned toward her Deliverer, once think of his
Escape, or give herself any Concern or Trouble to prevent it.

Jones therefore, at his Return, found the Woman alone. He would have spent
some Time in searching for Northerton; but she would not permit him; earnestly
entreating that he would accompany her to the Town whither they had been
directed. 'As to the Fellow's Escape,' said she, 'it gives me no Uneasiness:
For Philosophy and Christianity both preach up Forgiveness of Injuries. But for
you, Sir, I am concerned at the Trouble I give you, nay indeed my Nakedness may
well make me ashamed to look you in the Face; and if it was not for the Sake of
your Protection, I should wish to go alone.'

Jones offered her his Coat; but, I know not for what Reason, she absolutely
refused the most earnest Solicitations to accept it. He then begged her to
forget both the Causes of her Confusion. 'With Regard to the former,' says he,
'I have done no more than my Duty in protecting you; and as for the latter, I
will entirely remove it, by walking before you all the Way; for I would not
have my Eyes offend you, and I could not answer for my Power of resisting the
attractive Charms of so much Beauty.'

Thus our Hero and the redeemed Lady walked in the same Manner as Orpheus and
Eurydice marched heretofore: But though I cannot believe that Jones was
designedly tempted by his Fair One to look behind him, yet as she frequently
wanted his Assistance to help her over Styles, and had besides many Trips and
other Accidents, he was often obliged to turn about. However, he had better
Fortune than what attended poor Orpheus; for he brought his Companion, or
rather Follower, safe into the famous Town of Upton.

CHAP. III. The Arrival of Mr. Jones, with his Lady, at the Inn, with a very
full Description of the Battle of Upton.
THOUGH the Reader, we doubt not, is very eager to know what this Lady was, and
how she fell into the Hands of Mr. Northerton; we must beg him to suspend his
Curiosity for a short Time, as we are obliged, for some very good Reasons,
which hereafter perhaps he may guess, to delay his Satisfaction a little longer.

Mr. Jones and his fair Companion no sooner entered the Town, than they went
directly to that Inn which, in their Eyes, presented the fairest Appearance to
the Street. Here Jones, having ordered a Servant to show a Room above Stairs,
was ascending, when the dishevelled Fair hastily following, was laid hold on by
the Master of the House, who cried, 'Hey day, where is that Beggar Wench going?
stay below Stairs, I desire you;' but Jones at that Instant thundered from
above, 'Let the Lady come 'up,' in so authoritative a Voice, that the good Man
instantly withdrew his Hands, and the Lady made the best of her way to the
Chamber.

Here Jones wished her Joy of her safe Arrival, and then departed, in order, as
he promised, to send, the Landlady up with some Clothes. The poor Woman thanked
him heartily for all his Kindness, and said, She should see him again soon, to
thank him a thousand Times more. During this short Conversation, she covered
her white Bosom as well as she could possibly with her Arms: For Jones could
not avoid stealing a Peep or two, though he took all imaginable Care to avoid
giving any Offense.

Our Travelers had happened to take up their Residence at a House of exceeding
good Repute, whither Irish Ladies of strict Virtue, and many Northern Lasses of
the same Predicament, were accustomed to resort in their Way to Bath. The
Landlady therefore would by no Means have admitted any Conversation of a
disreputable Kind to pass under her Roof. Indeed so foul and contagious are all
such Proceedings, that they contaminate the very innocent Scenes where they are
committed, and give the Name of a bad House, or of a House of ill Repute, to
all those where they are suffered to be carried on.

Not that I would intimate, that such strict Chastity as was preserved in the
Temple of Vesta can possibly be maintained at a public Inn. My good Landlady
did not hope for such a Blessing, nor would any of the Ladies I have spoken of,
or indeed any others of the most rigid Note, have expected or insisted on any
such Thing. But to exclude all Vulgar Concubinage, and to drive all Whores in
Rags from within the Walls, is within the Power of every one. This my Landlady
very stiffly adhered to, and this her virtuous Guests, who did not travel in
Rags, would very reasonably have expected of her.

Now it required no very blameable Degree of Suspicion, to imagine that Mr.
Jones and his ragged Companion had certain Purposes in their Intention, which,
though tolerated in some Christian Countries, connived at in others, and
practiced in all; are however as expressly forbidden as Murder, or any other
horrid Vice, by that Religion which is universally believed in those Countries.
The Landlady therefore had no sooner received an Intimation of the Entrance of
the abovesaid Persons, than she began to meditate the most expeditious Means
for their Expulsion. In order to this, she had provided herself with a long and
deadly Instrument, with which, in Times of Peace, the Chambermaid was wont to
demolish the Labors of the Industrious Spider. In vulgar Phrase, she had taken
up the Broomstick, and was just about to sally from the Kitchen, when Jones
accosted her with a Demand of a Gown, and other Vestments, to cover the half
naked woman above Stairs.

Nothing can be more provoking to the human Temper, nor more dangerous to that
cardinal Virtue, Patience, than Solicitations of extraordinary Offices of
Kindness, on Behalf of those very Persons with whom we are highly incensed. For
this Reason Shakespeare has artfully introduced his Desdemona soliciting
Favors for Cassio of her Husband, as the Means of enflaming not only his
Jealousy, but his Rage, to the highest Pitch of Madness; and we find the
unfortunate Moor less able to Command his Passion on this Occasion, than even
when he beheld his valued Present to his Wife in the Hands of his supposed
Rival. In Fact, we regard these Efforts as Insults on our Understanding, and to
such the Pride of Man is very difficultly brought to submit.

My Landlady, though a very good-tempered Woman, had, I suppose, some of this
Pride in her Composition; for Jones had scarce ended his Request, when she fell
upon him with a certain Weapon, which though it be neither long, nor sharp, nor
hard, nor indeed threatens from its Appearance with either Death or Wound, has
been however held in great Dread and Abhorrence by many wise Men; nay, by many
brave ones; insomuch that some who have dared to look into the Mouth of a
loaded Cannon, have not dared to look into a Mouth where this Weapon was
brandished; and rather than run the Hazard of its Execution, have contented
themselves with making a most pitiful and sneaking Figure in the Eyes of all
their Acquaintance.

To Confess the Truth, I am afraid Mr. Jones was one of these; for though he was
attacked and violently belabored with the aforesaid Weapon, he could not be
provoked to make any Resistance; but in a most cowardly Manner applied, with
many Entreatries, to his Antagonist to desist from pursuing her Blows; in plain
English, he only begged her with the utmost Earnestness to hear him; but before
he could obtain his Request, my Landlord himself entered into the Fray, and
embraced that Side of the Cause which seemed to stand very little in need of
Assistance.

There are a Sort of Heroes who are supposed to be determined in their choosing
or avoiding a Conflict by the Character and Behavior of the Person whom they
are to engage. These are said to know their Man, and Jones, I believe, knew his
Woman; for though he had been so submissive to her, he was no sooner attacked by
her Husband, than he demonstrated an immediate Spirit of Resentment, and
enjoined him Silence under a very severe Penalty; no less than that, I think,
of being converted into Fuel for his own Fire.

The Husband, with great Indignation, but with a Mixture of Pity, answered,
'You must pray first to be made able; I believe I am a better Man than
yourself; ay, every Way, that I am;' and presently proceeded to discharge half
a dozen Whores at the Lady above Stairs, the last of which had scarce issued
from his Lips, when a swinging Blow from the Cudgel that Jones carried in his
Hand assaulted him over the Shoulders.

It is a Question whether the Landlord or the Landlady was the most expeditious
in returning this Blow. My Landlord, whose Hands were empty, fell to with his
Fist, and the good Wife, uplifting her Broom, and aiming at the Head of Jones,
had probably put an immediate End to the Fray, and to Jones likewise, had not
the Descent of this Broom been prevented -- not by the miraculous Intervention
of any Heathen Deity, but by a very natural, though fortunate Accident; viz. by
the Arrival of Partridge; who entered the House at that Instant (for Fear had
caused him to run every Step from the Hill) and who, seeing the Danger which
threatened his Master, o^ Companion, (which you choose to call him) prevented so
sad a Catastrophe, by catching hold of the Landlady's Arm, as it was brandished
aloft in the Air.

The Landlady soon perceived the Impediment which prevented her Blow; and being
unable to rescue her Arm from the Hands of Partridge, she let fall the Broom,
and then leaving Jones to the Discipline of her Husband, she fell with the
utmost Fury on that poor Fellow, who had already given some Intimation of
himself, by crying, 'Zounds! do 'you intend to kill my Friend?'

Partridge, though not much addicted to Battle, would not however stand still
when his Friend was attacked; nor was he much displeased with that Part of the
Combat which fell to his Share: He therefore returned my Landlady's Blows as
soon as he received them; and now the Fight was obstinately maintained on all
Parts, and it seemed doubtful to which Side Fortune would incline, when the
naked Lady, who had listened at the Top of the Stairs to the Dialogue which
preceded the Engagement, descended suddenly from above, and without weighing
the unfair Inequality of two to one, fell upon the poor Woman who was boxing
with Partridge; nor did that great Champion desist, but rather redoubled his
Fury, when he found fresh Succors were arrived to his Assistance.

Victory must now have fallen to the Side of the Travelers (for the bravest
Troops must yield to Numbers) had not Susan the Chambermaid come luckily to
support her Mistress. This Susan was as two-handed a Wench (according to the
Phrase) as any in the Country, and would, I believe, have beat the famed
Thalestris herself, or any of her subject Amazons; for her Form was robust and
manlike, and every Way made for such Encounters. As her Hands and Arms were
formed to give Blows with great Mischief to an Enemy, so was her Face as well
contrived to receive Blows without any great Injury to herself: Her Nose being
already flat to her Face; her Lips were so large that no Swelling could be
perceived in them, and moreover they were so hard, that a Fist could hardly
make any Impression on them. Lastly, her Cheek-Bones stood out, as if Nature
had intended them for two Bastions to defend her Eyes in those Encounters for
which she seemed so well calculated, and to which she was most wonderfully well
inclined.

This fair Creature entering the Field of Battle, immediately filed to that
Wing where her Mistress maintained so unequal a Fight with one of either Sex.
Here she presently challenged Partridge to single Combat. He accepted the
Challenge, and a most desperate Fight began between them.

Now the Dogs of War being let loose, began to lick their bloody Lips; now
Victory with Golden Wings hung hovering in the Air. Now Fortune taking her
Scales from her Shelf, began to weigh the Fates of Tom Jones, his Female
Companion, and Partridge, against the Landlord, his Wife, and Maid; all which
hung in exact Balance before her; when a good-natured Accident put suddenly an
End to the bloody Fray, with which half of the Combatants had already
sufficiently feasted. This Accident was the Arrival of a Coach and four; upon
which my Landlord and Landlady immediately desisted from fighting, and at their
Entreaty obtained the same Favor of their Antagonists; but Susan was not so
kind to Partridge, for that Amazonian Fair having overthrown and bestrid her
Enemy, was now cuffing him lustily with both her Hands, without any Regard to
his Request of a Cessation of Arms, or to those loud Acclamations of Murder
which he roared forth.

No sooner, however, had Jones quitted the Landlord, than he flew to the Rescue
of his defeated Companion, from whom he with much Difficulty drew off the
enraged Chambermaid; but Partridge was not immediately sensible of his
Deliverance; for he still lay flat on the Floor, guarding his Face with his
Hands, nor did he cease roaring till Jones had forced him to look up, and to
perceive that the Battle was at an End.

The Landlord who had no visible Hurt, and the Landlady hiding her well
scratched Face with her Handkerchief ran both hastily to the Door to attend the
Coach, from which a young Lady and her Maid now alighted. These the Landlady
presently ushered into that Room where Mr. Jones had at first deposited his
fair Prize, as it was the best Apartment in the House. Hither they were obliged
to pass through the Field of Battle, which they did with the utmost Haste,
covering their Faces with their Handkerchiefs, as desirous to avoid the Notice
of any one. Indeed their Caution was quite unnecessary: For the poor
unfortunate Helen, the fatal Cause of all the Bloodshed, was entirely taken up
in endeavoring to conceal her own Face, and Jones was no less occupied in
rescuing Partridge from the Fury of Susan; which being happily effected, the
poor Fellow immediately departed to the Pump to wash his Face, and to stop that
bloody Torrent which Susan had plentifully set a flowing from his Nostrils.

CHAP. IV. In which the Arrival of a Man of War puts a final End to
Hostilities, and causes the Conclusion of a firm and lasting Peace between all
Parties.
A Sergeant and a File of Musketeers, with a Deserter in their Custody,
arrived about this Time. The Sergeant presently enquired for the principal
Magistrate of the Town, and was informed by my Landlord, that he himself was
vested in that Office. He then demanded his Billets, together with a Mug of
Beer, and complaining it was cold, spread himself before the Kitchen Fire.

Mr. Jones was at this Time comforting the poor distressed Lady, who sat down
at a Table in the Kitchen, and leaning her Head upon her Arm, was bemoaning her
Misfortunes; but lest my fair Readers should be in Pain concerning a particular
Circumstance, I think proper here to acquaint them, that before she had quitted
the Room above Stairs, she had so well covered herself with a Pillowbere which
she there found, that her Regard to Decency was not in the least violated by
the Presence of so many Men as were now in the Room.

One of the Soldiers now went up to the Sergeant, and whispered something in
his Ear; upon which he steadfastly fixed his Eyes on the Lady, and having looked
at her for near a Minute, he came up to her, saying, 'I ask Pardon, Madam, but
I am certain I am not deceived, you can be no other Person than Captain
Waters's Lady.'

The poor Woman, who in her present Distress had very little regarded the Face
of any Person present, no sooner looked at the Sergeant, than she presently
recollected him, and calling him by his Name, answered, 'That she was indeed
the unhappy Person he imagined her to be; but added, I wonder any one should
know me in this Disguise.' To which the Sergeant replied, 'he was very much
surprised to see her Ladyship in such a Dress, and was afraid some Accident had
happened to her.' 'An Accident has happened to me, indeed,' says she, 'and I
am highly obliged to this Gentleman (pointing to Jones) that it was not a fatal
one, or that I am now living to mention it.' 'Whatever the Gentleman has
done,' cries the Sergeant, 'I am sure the Captain will make him Amends for it;
and if I can be of any Service, your Ladyship may command me, and I shall think
myself very happy to have it in my Power to serve your Ladyship; and so indeed
may any one, for I know the Captain will well reward them for it.'

The Landlady who heard from the Stairs all that past between the Sergeant and
Mrs. Waters, came hastily down, and running directly up to her, began to ask
Pardon for the Offenses she had committed, begging that all might be imputed to
Ignorance of her Quality: For, 'Lud! Madam,' says she, 'how should I have
imagined that a Lady of your Fashion would appear in such a Dress? I am sure,
Madam, if I had once suspected that your Ladyship was your Ladyship, I would
sooner have burnt my Tongue out, than have said what I have said: And I hope
your Ladyship will accept of a Gown, till you can get your own Clothes.'

'Prithee Woman,' says Mrs. Waters, 'cease your Impertinence: How can you
imagine I should concern myself about any thing which comes from the Lips of
such low Creatures as yourself. But I am surprised at your Assurance in
thinking, after what is past, that I will condescend to put on any of your
dirty Things. I would have you know, Creature, I have a Spirit above that.'

Here Jones interfered, and begged Mrs. Waters to forgive the Landlady, and to
accept her Gown: 'For I must confess,' cries he, 'our Appearance was a little
suspicious when first we came in; and I am well assured, all this good Woman
did, was, as she professed, out of Regard to the Reputation of her House.'

'Yes, upon my truly was it,' says she; 'the Gentleman speaks very much like a
Gentleman, and I see very plainly is so; and to be certain the House is well
known to be a House of as good Reputation as any on the Road, and though I say
it, is frequented by Gentry of the best Quality, both Irish and English. I defy
any Body to say black is my Eye, for that Matter. And, as I was saying, if I
had known your Ladyship to be your Ladyship, I would as soon have burnt my
Fingers as have affronted your Ladyship; but truly where Gentry come and spend
their Money, I am not willing that they should be scandalized by a Set of poor
shabby Vermin, that wherever they go, leave more Lice than Money bebind them;
such Folks never raise my Compassion: For to be certain, it is foolish to have
any for them, and if our Justices did as they ought, they would be all whipped
out of the Kingdom; for to be certain it is what is most fitting for them. But
as for your Ladyship, I am heartily sorry your Ladyship has had a Misfortune,
and if your Ladyship will do me the Honor to wear my Clothes till you can get
some of your Ladyship's own, to be certain the best I have is at your
Ladyship's Service.'

Whether Cold, Shame, or the Persuasions of Mr. Jones prevailed most with Mrs.
Waters, I will not determine; but she suffered herself to be pacified by this
Speech of my Landlady, and retired with that good Woman, in order to apparel
herself in a decent Manner.

My Landlord was likewise beginning his Oration to Jones, but was presently
interrupted by that generous Youth, who shook him heartily by the Hand; and
assured him of entire Forgiveness, saying, 'If you are satisfied, my worthy
Friend, I promise you I am;' and indeed in one Sense the Landlord had the
better Reason to be satisfied; for he had received a Bellyfull of Drubbing,
whereas Jones had scarce felt a single Blow.

Partridge, who had been all this Time washing his bloody Nose at the Pump,
returned into the Kitchen at the Instant when his Master and the Landlord were
shaking Hands with each other. As he was of a peaceable Disposition, he was
pleased with those Symptoms of Reconciliation; and though his Face bore some
Marks of Susan's Fist, and many more of her Nails, he rather chose to be
contented with his Fortune in the last Battle, than to endeavor at bettering
it in another.

The heroic Susan was likewise well contented with her Victory, though it had
cost her a Black-Eye, which Partridge had given her at the first Onset. Between
these two, therefore, a League was struck, and those Hands which had been the
Instruments of War, became now the Mediators of Peace.

Matters were thus restored to a perfect Calm, at which the Sergeant, though it
may seem so contrary to the Principles of his Profession, testified his
Approbation. 'Why now, that is friendly, said he; D -- n me, I hate to see two
People bear Illwill to one another, after they have had a Tussel. The only Way
when Friends quarrel, is to see it out fairly in a friendly Manner, as a Man
may call it, either with Fist, or Sword, or Pistol, according as they like, and
then let it be all over: For my own Part, d -- n me if ever I love my Friend
better than when I am fighting with him. To bear Malice is more like a
Frenchman than an Englishman.'

He then proposed a Libation as a necessary Part of the Ceremony at all
Treaties of that Kind. Perhaps the Reader may here conclude that he was well
versed ^n ancient History; but this, though highly probable, as he cited no
Authority to support the Custom, I will not affirm with any Confidence. Most
likely indeed it is, that he founded his Opinion on very good Authority, since
he confirmed it with many violent Oaths.

Jones no sooner heard the Proposal, than immediately agreeing with the learned
Sergeant, he ordered a Bowl, or rather a large Mug, filled with the Liquor used
on these Occasions to be brought in, and then began the Ceremony himself. He
placed his Right Hand in that of the Landlord, and seizing the Bowl with his
Left, uttered the usual Words, and then made his Libation. After which the same
was observed by all present. Indeed there is very little Need of being
particular in describing the whole Form, as it differe^^ so little from those
Libations of which so much is recorded in ancient Authors, and their modern
Transcribers. The principal Difference lay in two Instances: For first, the
present Company poured the Liquor only down their Throats; and, 2dly, The
Se^jeant, who officiated as Priest, drank the last; but h^ preserved, I
believe, that ancient Form in swallowing much the largest Draught of the whole
Company, an^ in being the only Person present who contributed nothing toward
the Libation, besides his good Offic^ in assisting at the Performance.

The good People now ranged themselves roun^ the Kitchen Fire, where good
Humor seemed ^^ maintain an absolute Dominion, and Partridge n^^ only forgot
his shameful Defeat, but converted Hunger into Thirst, and soon became
extremely facetiou^ We must, however, quit this agreeable Assembly for while,
and attend Mr. Jones to Mrs. Waters' Apartment, where the Dinner which he had
bespok^ was now on the Table. Indeed it took no loo^ Time in preparing, having
been all dressed three Day before, and required nothing more from the Cook tha^
to warm it over again.

CHAP. V. An Apology for all Heroes who have good Stomach* with a Description
of a Battle of the amorous Kind.
HEROES, notwithstanding the high Ideas which by the Means of Flatterers they
may entertain of themselves, or the World may conceive o^ them, have certainly
more of mortal than divine about them. However elevated their Minds may be,
their Bodies at least (which is much the major Part of most are liable to the
worst Infirmities, and subject to the vilest Offices of human Nature. Among
these latter the Act of Eating, which has by several wise Men been considered
as extremely mean and derogatory from the Philosophic Dignity, must be in some
Measure performed by the greatest Prince, Hero, or Philosopher upon Earth;
nay, sometimes Nature has been so Frolicksome as to exact of these dignified
Characters, a much more exorbitant Share of this Office, than she has obliged
those of the lowest Order to perform.

To say the Truth, as no known Inhabitant of this Globe is really more than
Man, so none need be ashamed of submitting to what the Necessities of Man
demand; but when those great Personages I have just mentioned, condescend to
aim at confining such low Offices to themselves; as when by hoarding or
destroying, they seem desirous to prevent any others from eating, they then
surely become very low and despicable.

Now after this short Preface, we think it no Disparagement to our Hero to
mention the immoderate Ardour with which he laid about him at this Season.
Indeed it may be doubted, whether Ulysses, who by the Way seems to have had the
best Stomach of all the Heroes in that eating Poem of the Odyssey, ever made a
better Meal. Three Pounds at least of that Flesh which formerly had contributed
to the Composition of an Ox, was now honored with becoming Part of the
individual Mr. Jones.

This Particular we thought ourselves obliged to mention, as it may account for
our Hero's temporary Neglect of his fair Companion; who eat but very little,
and was indeed employed in considerations of a very different Nature, which
passed unobserved by Jones, till he had entirely satisfied that Appetite which
a Fast of twenty-four Hours had procured him; but his Dinner was no sooner
ended, than his Attention to other Matters revived; with these Matters
therefore we shall now proceed to acquaint the Reader.

Mr. Jones, of whose personal Accomplishment^ we have hitherto said very
little, was in reality, one of the handsomest young Fellows in the World. Hi^
Face, besides being the Picture of Health, had in i^ the most apparent Marks of
Sweetness and Goodnature. These Qualities were indeed so characteristica^ in
his Countenance, that while the Spirit and Sensibility in his Eyes, though they
must have been perceived by an accurate Observer, might have escaped the Notice
of the less discerning, so strongly was this Goodnature painted in his Look,
that it was remarked by almost every one who saw him.

It was, perhaps, as much owing to this, as to a very fine Complexion, that
his Face had a Delicacy in it almost inexpressible, and which might have given
him an Air rather too effeminate, had it not been joined to a most masculine
Person and Mein; which latter had as much in them of the Hercules, as the
former had of the Adonis. He was besides active, genteel, gay and good
humoured, and had a Flow o^ Animal Spirits, which enlivened every Conversation
where he was present.

When the Reader has duly reflected on these many Charms which all centered in
our Hero, and considers at the same Time the fresh Obligations which Mrs.
Waters had to him, it will be a Mark of more Prudery than Candor to entertain
a bad Opinion o^ her, because she conceived a very good Opinion o^ him.

But whatever Censures may be passed upon her, i^ is my Business to relate
Matters of Fact with Veracity. Mrs. Waters had, in Truth, not only a good
Opinion of our Hero, but a very great Affection for him. To speak out boldly
at once, she was in Love according to the present universally received Sense o^
^at Phrase, by which Love is applied indiscriminate^^ to the desirable Objects
of all our Passions, Appe^^es, and Senses, and is understood to be that
Prefe^ence which we give to one Kind of Food rather than (...) another.

But though the Love to these several Objects may pos^bly be one and the same in
all Cases, its Operations ^owever must be allowed to be different; for how ^uch
soever we may be in Love with an excellent ^urloin of Beef, or Bottle of
Burgundy; with a Da^ask Rose, or Cremona Fiddle; yet do we never ^^ile, nor
ogle, nor dress, nor flatter, nor endeaour by any other Arts or Tricks to gain
the Affection (...) the said Beef, etc. Sigh indeed we sometimes may; ^ut it is
generally in the Absence, not in the Presence (...) the beloved Object. For
otherwise we might possibly ^omplain of their Ingratitude and Deafness, with
the ^^me Reason as Pasiphae does of her Bull, whom she ^ndeavoured to engage by
all the Coquetry practiced ^ith good Success in the Drawing Room, on the ^uch
more sensible, as well as tender, Hearts of the ^ne Gentlemen there.

The contrary happens, in that Love which ope^tes between Persons of the same
Species, but of ^^fferent Sexes. Here we are no sooner in Love, ^^an it becomes
our principal Care to engage the Af^^ction of the Object beloved. For what
other Pur^ose indeed are our Youth instructed in all the Arts (...) rendering
themselves agreeable? If it was not with View to this Love, I question whether
any of those ^rades which deal in setting off and adorning the ^uman Person
would procure a Livelihood. Nay, ^ose great Polishers of our Manners, who are
by ^^me thought to teach what principally distinguishes (...) from the Brute
Creation, even Dancing-Masters ^^emselves, might possibly find no Place in
Society. (...) short, all the Graces which young Ladies and young Gentlemen too
learn from others; and the many Improvements which, by the help of a Looking
Glass, they add of their own, are in Reality those very Spicula and Faces
Amoris, so often mentioned by Ovid; or, as they are sometimes called in our own
Language, the whole Artillery of Love.

Now Mrs. Watres and our Hero had no sooner sat down together, than the former
began to play this Artillery upon the latter. But here, as we are about to
attempt a Description hitherto unessayed either in Prose or Verse, we think
proper to invoke the Assistance of certain Aerial Beings, who will, we doubt
not, come kindly to our Aid on this Occasion.

'Say then, you Graces, you that inhabit the heavenly Mansions of Seraphina's
Countenance; for you are truly Divine, are always in her Presence and well know
all the Arts of charming, say, what were the Weapons now used to captivate the
Heart of Mr. Jones.'

'First, from two lovely blue Eyes, whose bright Orbs flashed Lightning at
their Discharge, flew forth two pointed Ogles. But happily for our Hero, hit
only a vast Piece of Beef which he was then conveying into his Plate, and
harmless spen^ their Force. The fair Warrior perceived their Miscarriage, and
immediately from her fair Bosom drew forth a deadly Sigh. A Sigh which none
could have heard unmoved, and which was sufficient at once to have swept off a
dozen Beaus; so soft, so sweet so tender, that the insinuating Air must have
found its subtle Way to the Heart of our Hero, had it no^ luckily been driven
from his Ears by the coarse Bubbling of some bottled Ale, which at that Time he
was pouring forth. Many other Weapons did she assay; but the God of Eating (if
there be any such Deity; for I do not confidently assert it) preserved' his
Votary; or perhaps it may not be Dignus vindice nodus, and the present Security
of Jones may be accounted for by natural Means: For as Love frequently
preserves from the Attacks of Hunger, so may Hunger possibly, in some Cases,
defend us against Love.'

'The Fair One, enraged at her frequent Disappointments, determined on a short
Cessation of Arms. Which Interval she employed in making ready every Engine of
Amorous Warfare for the renewing of the Attack, when Dinner should be over.'

'No sooner then was the Cloth removed, than she again began her Operations.
First, having planted her Right Eye side-ways against Mr. Jones, she shot from
its Corner a most penetrating Glance: which, though great Part of its Force was
spent before it reached our Hero, did not vent itself absolutely without
Effect. This the Fair One perceiving, hastily withdrew her Eyes, and leveled
them downwards as if she was concerned for what she had done: Though by this
Means she designed only to draw him from his Guard, and indeed to open his
Eyes, through which she intended to surprise his Heart. And now, gently lifting
up those two bright Orbs which had already begun to make an Impression on poor
Jones, she discharged a Volicy of small Charms at once from her whole
Countenance in a Smile. Not a Smile of Mirth, nor of Joy; but a Smile of
Affection, which most Ladies have always ready at their Command, and which
serves them to show at once their Good Humor, their pretty Dimples, and their
white Teeth.'

'This Smile our Hero received full in his Eyes, and was immediately staggered
with its Force. He then began to see the Designs of the Enemy, and indeed to
feel their Success. A Parley now was set on Foot between the Parties; during
which the artful Fair so slily and imperceptibly carried on he^ Attack, that
she had almost subdued the Heart o^ our Hero, before she again repaired to
Acts o^ Hostility. To confess the Truth, I am afraid Mr. Jones maintained a
Kind of Dutch Defense and treacherously delivered up the Garrison with out duly
weighing his Allegiance to the fair Sophia. In short, no sooner had the amorous
Parley ended and the Lady had unmasked the Royal Battery, by carelessly letting
her Handherchief drop from he^ Neck, than the Heart of Mr. Jones was entirely
taken, and the fair Conqueror enjoyed the usual Fruits of her Victory.'

Here the Graces think proper to end their Description, and here we think
proper to end the Chapter.

CHAP. VI. A friendly Conversation in the Kitche, which had very common, though
not friendly Conclusion.
WHILE our Lovers were entertaining themselves in the Manner which is partly
described in the foregoing Chapter; they were likewise furnishing out an
entertainment for their good Friends in the Kitchen. And this in a double
Sense, by affording them Matter for their Conversation, and, at the same Time,
Drink to enliven their Spirits.

There were now assembled round the Kitchen Fire besides my Landlord and
Landlady, who occasionally went backward and forward, Mr. Partridge, the
Sergeant, and the Coachman who drove the young Lady and her Maid.

Partridge having acquainted the Company with what he had learnt from the Man
of the Hill, concerning the Situation in which Mrs. Waters had been found by
Jones, the Sergeant proceeded to that Part of her History which was known to
him. He said she was the Wife of Mr. Waters, who was a Captain ^n their
Regiment, and had often been with him at Quarters. 'Some Folks,' says he, 'used
indeed to doubt whether they were lawfully married in a Church or no. But for
my Part, that is no Business of mine; I must own, if I was put to my Corporal
Oath, I believe she is little better than one of us, and I fancy the Captain
may go to Heaven when the Sun shines upon a rainy Day. But if he does, that is
neither here nor there, for he will not want Company. And the Lady, to give the
Devil his Due, is a very good Sort of Lady, and loves the Cloth, and is always
desirous to do strict Justice to it; for she has begged off many a poor
Soldier, and, by her Goodwill, would never have any of them punished. But yet,
to be sure, Ensign Northerton and she were very well acquainted together, at
our last Quarters, that is the very Right and Truth of the Matter. But the
Captain he knows nothing about it; and as long as there is enough for him too,
what does it signify? He loves her not a bit the worse, and I am certain would
run any Man through the Body that was to abuse her, therefore I don't abuse
her, for my Part. I only repeat what other Folks say; and to be certain, what
every body says, there must be some Truth in.' 'Ay, ay, a great deal of Truth,
I warrant you,' cries Partridge, 'Veritas odium parit.' 'All a Parcel of
scandalous Stuff,' answered the Mis^^ess of the House. 'I am sure now she is
dressed, she looks like a very good Sort of Lady, and she behaves herself like
one; for she gave me a Guinea for the Use of my Clothes.' 'A very good Lady
indeed.' cries my Landlord, 'and if you had not been a little too hasty, you
would not have quarrelled with her as you did at first.' 'You need mention that
with my truly,' answered she, 'if it had not been for your Nonsense, nothing
had happened. You must be meddling with what did not belong to you, and throw
in your Fool's Discourse.' 'Well, well,' answered he, 'what's past cannot be
mended, so there is an End of the Matter.' 'Yes,' cries she, 'for this once, but
will it be mended ever the more hereafter? This is not the first Time I have
suffered for your Numscull's Pate. I wish you would always hold your Tongue in
the House, and meddle only in Matters without Doors which concern you. Don't
you remember what happened about seven Years ago? -- 'Nay, my Dear,' returned
he, 'don'^ rip up old Stories. Come, come, all is well, and I am sorry for what
I have done.' The Landlady was going to reply, but was prevented by the Peace*
making Sergeant, sorely to the Displeasure of Partridge who was a great Lover
of what is called Fun, and a great Promoter of those harmless Quarrels which
tend rather to the Production of comical than tragical Incidents.

The Sergeant asked Partridge whither he and hi^ Master were traveling. 'None
of your Magisters, answered Partridge, 'I am no Man's Servant, ^ assure you;
for though I have had Misfortunes in the World, I write Gentleman after my Name;
an^ as poor and as simple as I may appear now, I have taught Grammar School in
my Time. Sed he^ mihi non sum quod fui.' 'No Offense, I hope Sir,' said the
Sergeant, 'where then, if I man venture to be so bold, may you and your Frien^
be traveling?' -- 'You have now denominated u^ right,' says Partridge. 'Amici
Sumus. And ^ promise you my Friend is one of the greatest Gentlemen in the
Kingdom,' (at which Words bo^ Landlord and Landlady pricked up their Ears 'He
is the Heir of Squire Allworthy.' 'What, the Squire who does so much Good all
over the Country,' cries my Landlady? 'Even he,' answere^ Partridge. 'Then I
warrant,' says she, 'he'll ha^^ 'a swinging great Estate hereafter.' Most
certainly answered Partridge. Well,' replied the Landlady, 'I thought the first
Moment I saw him he looked like a good Sort of Gentleman; but my Husband here,
to be sure, is wiser than any body.' 'I own, my Dear,' cries he, 'it was a
Mistake.' 'A Mistake indeed!' answered she: 'but when did you ever know me to
make such Mistakes?' -- But how comes it, Sir,' cries the Landlord, 'that such
a great Gentleman walks about the Country afoot?' 'I don't know,' returned
Partridge, 'great Gentlemen have Humors sometimes. He has now a dozen Horses
and Servants at Gloucester, and nothing would serve him, but last Night, it
being very hot Weather, he must cool himself with a Walk to yon high Hill,
whither I likewise walked with him to bear him Company; but if ever you catch
me there again: For I was never so frightened in all my Life. We met with the
strangest Man there.' 'I'll be hanged,' cries the Landlord, 'if it was not the
Man of the Hill, as they call him; if indeed he be a Man; but I know several
People who believe it is the Devil that lives there.' 'Nay, nay, like enough,'
says Partridge, 'and now you put me in the Head of it, I verily and sincerely
believe it was the Devil; though I could not perceive his cloven Foot; but
perhaps he might have the Power given him to hide that, since evil Spirits can
appear in what Shapes they please.' 'And pray, Sir,' says the Sergeant, 'no
Offense I hope; but pray what Sort of a Gentleman is the Devil? For I have
heard some of our Officers say, There is no such Person, and that it is only a
Trick of the Parsons, to prevent their being broke; for if it was publicly
known that there was no Devil, the Parsons would be of no more Use than we are
in Time of Peace.' Those Officers,' says Partridge,' 'are very great Scholars,
I suppose.' 'Not much of Schollards neither,' answered the Sergeant, 'they have
not half your Learning, Sir, I believe; and to be sure, I thought there must be
a Devil, notwithstanding what they said, though one of them was a Captain; for
methought, thinks I to my self, if there be no Devil, how can wicked People be
sent to him, and I have read all that upon a Book.' 'Some of your Officers,'
quoth the Landlord, 'will find there is a Devil, to their Shame, I believe. I
don't question but he will pay off some old Scores, upon my Account. Here was one
quartered upon me half a Year, who had the Conscience to take up one of my best
Beds, though he hardly spent a Shilling a Day in the House, and suffered his Men
to roast Cabbages at the Kitchen Fire, because I would not give them a Dinner
on a Sunday. Every good Christian must desire there should be a Devil for the
Punishment of such Wretches.' 'Harkee, Landlord,' said the Sergeant, 'don't
abuse the Cloth, for I will not take it.' D -- n the Cloth,' answered the
Landlord, 'I have suffered enough by them. 'Bear Witness, Gentlemen,' says the
Sergeant, 'he curses the King, and that is High Treason.' 'I curse the King! you
Villain,' said the Landlord. 'Yes you did,' cries the Sergeant, 'you cursed the
Cloth, and that is cursing the King. It Is all one and the same; for every Man
who curses the Cloth, would curse the King if he durst; so for Matter of that,
it is all one and the same Thing.' Excuse me there, Mr. Sergeant,' quoth
Partridge, 'that's a Non Sequitur.' 'None of your outlandish Lingo,' answered
the Seajeant, leaping from his Seat, 'I will not sit still and hear the Cloth
abused.' -- 'You, mistake me, Friend,' cries Partridge, 'I did not mean to
abuse the Cloth; I only said your Conclusion was a Non Sequitur.' This Word,
which the Sergeant unhappily mistook for an Affront, is a Term in Logic, and
means that the Conclusion does not follow from the Premises.
' 'You are another,' cries the Sergeant, 'an you come to that. No more a
Sequitur than yourself. You are a Pack of Rascals, and I Will prove it; for I
will fight the best Man of you all for twenty Pound.' This Challenge
effectually silenced Partridge, whose Stomach for drubbing did not so soon
return, after the hearty Meal which he had lately been treated with; but the
Coachman, whose Bones were less sore, and whose Appetite for Fighting was
somewhat sharper, did not so easily brook the Affront, of which he conceived
some Part at least fell to his Share. He started therefore from his Seat, and
advancing to the Sergeant, swore he looked on himself to be as good a Man as
any in the Army, and offered to box for a Guinea. The military Man accepted the
Combat but refused the Wager; upon which both immediately stripped and engaged,
till the Driver of Horses was so well mauled by the Leader of Men, that he was
obliged to exhaust his small Remainder of Breath in begging for Quarter.

The young Lady was now desirous to depart, and had given Orders for her Coach
to be prepared; but all in vain; for the Coachman was disabled from performing
his Office for that Evening. An ancient Heathen would perhaps have imputed this
Disability to the God of Drink, no less than to the God of War; for, in
Reality, both the Combatants had sacrificed as well to the former Deity as to
the latter. To speak plainly, they were both dead drunk, nor was Partridge in a
much better Situation. As for my Landlord, drinking was his Trade, and the
Liquor had no more Effect on him, than it had on any other Vessel in his House.

The Mistress of the Inn being summoned to attend Mr. Jones and his Companion,
at their Tea, gave a full Relation of the latter Part of the foregoing Scene;
and at the same Time expressed great Concern for the young Lady, 'who,' she
said,' was under the utmost Uneasiness at being prevented from pursuing her
Journey. 'She is a sweet pretty Creature,' added she, 'and I am certain I have
seen her Face before. I fancy she is in Love, and running away from her
Friends. Who knows but some young Gentleman or other may be expecting her, with
a Heart as heavy as her own.'

Jones fetched a hearty Sigh at those Words; of which, though Mrs. Waters
observed it, she took no Notice while the Landlady continued in the Room; but
after the Departure of that good Woman, she could not forbear giving our Hero
certain Hints of her suspecting some very dangerous Rival in his Affections.
The awkward Behavior of Mr. Jones on this Occasion convinced her of the Truth,
without his giving her a direct Answer to any of her Questions; but she was not
nice enough in her Amors to be greatly concerned at the Discovery. The Beauty
of Jones highly charmed her Eye; but, as she could not see his Heart, she gave
herself no concern about it. She could feast heartily at the Table of Love,
without reflecting that some other already had been, or hereafter might be,
feasted with the same Repast. A Sentiment which, if it deals but little in
Refinement, deals however much in Substance; and is less capricious, and
perhaps less ill-natured and selfish than the Desires of those Females who can
be contented enough to abstain from the Possession of their Lovers, provided
they are sufficiently satisfied that no one else possesses them.

CHAP. VII. Containing a fuller Account of Mrs. Waters, and by what Means she
came into that distressful Situation from which she was rescued by Jones.
THOUGH Nature has by no Means mixed up an equal Share either of Curiosity or
Vanity in every human Composition, there is perhaps no Individual to whom she
has not allotted such a Proportion of both, as requires much Art and Pains
too, to subdue and keep under. A Conquest, however, absolutely necessary to
every one who would in any Degree deserve the Characters of Wisdom or
Good-Breeding.

As Jones therefore might very justly be called a well-bred Man, he had stifled
all that Curiosity which the extraordinary Manner in which he had found Mrs.
Waters, must be supposed to have occasioned. He had indeed at first thrown out
some few Hints to the Lady; but when he perceived her industriously avoiding
any Explanation, he was contented to remain in Ignorance, the rather as he was
not without Suspicion, that there were some Circumstances which must have
raised her Blushes, had she related the whole Truth.

Now, since it is possible that some of our Readers may not so easily acquiesce
under the same Ignorance, and as we are very desirous to satisfy them all, we
have taken uncommon Pains to inform ourselves of the real Fact, with the
Relation of which we shall conclude this Book.

This Lady then had lived some Years with one Captain Waters, who was a Captain
in the same Regiment to which Mr. Northerton belonged. She past for that
Gentleman's Wife, and went by his Name; and yet, as the Sergeant said, there
were some Doubts concerning the Reality of their Marriage, which we shall not
at present take upon us to resolve.

Mrs. Waters, I am sorry to say it, had for some Time contracted an Intimacy
with the above mentioned Ensign, which did no great Credit to her Reputation.
That she had a remakable Fondness for that young Fellow is most certain; but
whether she indulged this to any very criminal Lengths, is not so extremely
clear, unless we will suppose that Women never grant every Favor to a Man but
one, without granting him that one also.

The Division of the Regiment to which Captain Waters belonged, had two Days
preceded the March of that Company to which Mr. Northerton was the Ensign; so
that the former had reached Worcester, the very Day after the unfortunate
Rencounter between Jones and Northerton, which we have before recorded.

Now it had been agreed between Mrs. Waters and the Captain, that she should
accompany him in his March as far as Worcester, where they were to take their
Leave of each other, and she was thence to return to Bath, where she was to
stay till the End of the Winter's Campaign against the Rebels.

With this Agreement Mr. Northerton was made acquainted. To say the Truth, the
Lady had made him an Assignation at this very Place, and promised to stay at
Worcester till his Division came thither; with what View, and for that Purpose
must be left to the Reader's Divination: For though we are obliged to relate
Facts, we are not obliged to do a Violence to our Nature by any Comments to the
Disadvantage of the loveliest Part of the Creation.

Northerton no sooner obtained a Release from his Captivity, as we have seen,
than he hasted away to overtake Mrs. Waters; which, as he was a very active
nimble Fellow, he did at the last mentioned City, some few Hours after Captain
Waters had left her: At his first Arrival he made no scruple of acquainting her
with the unfortunate Accident, which he made appear very unfortunate indeed:
For he totally extracted every Particle of what could be called Fault, at least
in a Court of Honor, though he left some Circumstances which might be
questionable in a Court of Law.

Women, to their Glory be it spoken, are more generally capable of that violent
and apparently disinterested Passion of Love, which seeks only the Good of its
Object, than Men. Mrs. Waters, therefore, was no sooner apprized of the Danger
to which her Lover was exposed, than she lost every Consideration besides that
of his Safety; and this being a Matter equally agreeable to the Gentleman, it
became the immediate Subject of Debate between them.

After much Consultation on this Matter, it was at length agreed, that the
Ensign should go across the Country to Hereford, whence he might find some
Conveyance to one of the Seaports in Wales, and thence might make his Escape
abroad. In all which Expedition Mrs. Waters declared she would bear him
Company; and for which she was able to furnish him with Money, a very material
Article to Mr. Northerton, she having then in her Pocket three Bank Notes to
the Amount of 90l. besides some Cash, and a Diamond Ring of pretty considerable
Value on her Finger. All which she, with the utmost Confidence, revealed to
this wicked Man, little suspecting she should by these Means inspire him with a
Design of robbing her. Now as they must, by taking Horses from Worcester, have
furnished any Pursuers with the Means of hereafter discovering their Rout, the
Ensign proposed, and the Lady presently agreed to make their first Stage on
Foot; for which Purpose the Hardness of the Frost was very seasonable.

The main Part of the Lady's Baggage was already at Bath, and she had nothing
with her at present besides a very small Quantity of Linen, which the Gallant
undertook to carry in his own Pockets. All Things, therefore, being settled in
the Evening, they arose early the next Morning, and at Five o'Clock departed
from Worcester, it being then above two Hours before Day. But the Moon which
was then at the full, gave them all the Light she was capable of affording.

Mrs. Waters was not of that delicate Race of Women who are obliged to the
Invention of Vehicles for the Capacity of removing themselves from one Place to
another, and with whom consequently a Coach is reckoned among the Necessaries
of Life. Her Limbs were indeed full of Strength and Agility, and as her Mind
was no less animated with Spirit, she was perfectly able to keep Pace with her
nimble Lover.

Having traveled on for some Miles in a High Road, which Northerton said he
was informed led to Hereford, they came at the Break of Day to the Side of a
large Wood, where he suddenly stopped, and affecting to meditate a Moment with
himself, expressed some Apprehensions from traveling any longer in so public a
Way. Upon which he easily persuaded his fair Companion to strike with him into
a Path which seemed to lead directly through the Wood, and which at length
brought them both to the Bottom of Mazard-Hill.

Whether the execrable Scheme which he now attempted to execute, was the Effect
of previous Deliberation, or whether it now first came into his Head, I cannot
determine. But being arrived in this lonely Place, where it was very improbable
he should meet with any Interruption; he suddenly slipped his Garter from his
Leg, and laying violent Hands on the poor Woman, endeavored to perpetrate that
dreadful and detestable Fact, which we have before commemorated, and which the
providential Appearance of Jones did so fortunately prevent.

Happy was it for Mrs. Waters, that she was not of the weakest Order of
Females; for no sooner did she perceive by his tying a Knot in his Garter, and
by his Declarations, what his Hellish Intentions were, than she stood stoutly
to her Defense, and so strongly struggled with her Enemy, screaming all the
while for Assistance, that she delayed the Execution of the Villain's Purpose
several Minutes, by which Means Mr. Jones came to her Relief, at that very
Instant when her Strength failed, and she was totally overpowered, and
delivered her from the Ruffian's Hands, with no other Loss than that of her
Clothes, which were torn from her Back, and of the Diamond Ring, which during
the Contention either dropped from her Finger, or was wrenched from it by
Northerton.

Thus, Reader, we have given thee the Fruits of a very painful Enquiry, which
for thy Satisfaction we have made into this Matter. And here we have opened to
thee a Scene of Folly, as well as Villainy, which we could scarce have believed
a human Creature capable of being guilty of; had we not remembered that this
Fellow was at that Time firmly persuaded, that he had already committed a
Murder, and had forfeited his Life to the Law. As he concluded therefore that
his only Safety lay in Flight, he thought the possessing himself of this poor
Woman's Money and Ring would make him Amends for the additional Burden he was
to lay on his Conscience.

And here, Reader, we must strictly caution thee, that thou do not take any
Occasion from the Misbehaviour of such a Wretch as this, to reflect on so
worthy and honorable a Body of Men, as are the Officers of our Army in
general. Thou will be pleased to consider, that this Fellow, as we have already
informed thee, had neither the Birth nor Education of a Gentleman, nor was a
proper Person to be enrolled among the Number of such. If therefore his
Baseness can justly reflect on any besides himself, it must be only on those
who gave him his Commission.

THE HISTORY OF A FOUNDLING.
BOOK X. In which the History goes forward about Twelve Hours.
CHAP. I. Containing Instructions very necessary to be perused by modern
Critics.
READER, it is impossible we should know what Sort of Person thou will be: For,
perhaps, thou may be as learned in Human Nature as Shakespeare himself was,
and, perhaps, thou may be no wiser than some of his Editors. Now, lest this
latter should be the Case, we think proper, before we go any farther together,
to give thee a few wholesome Admonitions; that thou may not as grossly
misunderstand and misrepresent us, as some of the said Editors have
misunderstood and misrepresented their Author.

First, then, we warn the not too hastily to condemn any of the Incidents in
this our History, as impertinent and foreign to our main Design, because thou
do not immediately conceive in what Manner such Incident may conduce to that
Design. This Work may, indeed, be considered as a great Creation of our own;
and for a little Reptile of a Critic to presume to find Fault with any of its
Parts, without knowing the Manner in which the Whole is connected, and before
he comes to the final Catastrophe, is a most presumptuous Absurdity. The
Allusion and Metaphor we have here made use of, we must acknowledge to be
infinitely too great for our Occasion, but there is, indeed, no other, which is
at all adequate to express the Difference between an Author of the first Rate
and a Critic of the lowest.

Another Caution we must give thee, my good Reptile, is, that thou do not
find out too near a Resemblance between certain Characters here introduced; as
for instance, between the Landlady who appears in the Seventh Book, and her in
the Ninth. Thou art to know, Friend, that there are certain Characteristics, in
which most Individuals of every Profession and Occupation agree. To be able to
preserve these Characteristics, and at the same Time to diversity their
Operations, is one Talent of a good Writer. Again, to mark the nice Distinction
between two Persons actuated by the same Vice or Folly is another; and as this
last Talent is found in very few Writers, so is the true Discernment of it
found in as few Readers; though, I believe the Observation of this forms a very
principal Pleasure in those who are capable of the Discovery: Every Person, for
Instance, can distinguish between Sir Epicure Mammon, and Sir Fopling Flutter;
but to know the Difference between Sir Fopling Flutter and Sir Courtly Nice,
requires a more exquisite Judgment: For want of which, vulgar Spectators of
Plays very often do great Injustice in the Theater; where I have sometimes
known a Poet in Danger of being convicted as a Thief, upon much worse Evidence
than the Resemblance of Hands has been held to be in the Law. In reality, I
apprehend every amorous Widow on the Stage would run the Hazard of being
condemned as a servile Imitation of Dido, but that happily very few of our
Playhouse Critics understand enough of Latin to read Virgil.

In the next place, we must admonish thee, my worthy Friend, (for perhaps, thy
Heart may be better than thy Head) not to condemn a Character as a bad one,
because it is not perfectly a good one. If thou do delight in these models of
Perfection, there are Books enough written to gratify thy Taste; but as we have
not, in the Course of our Conversation, ever happened to meet with any such
Person, we have not chosen to introduce any such here. To say the Truth, I a
little question whether mere Man ever arrived at this consummate Degree of
Excellence, as well as whether there has ever existed a Monster bad enough to
verify that

-- nulla virtute redemptum
A vitiis -- Whose Vices are not allayed with a single Virtue.

in Juvenal: Nor do I, indeed, conceive the good Purposes served by inserting
Characters of such angelic Perfection, or such diabolical Depravity, in any
Work of Invention: Since from contemplating either, the Mind of Man is more
likely to be overwhelmed with Sorrow and Shame, than to draw any good Uses from
such Patterns; for in the former Instance he may be both concerned and ashamed
to see a Pattern of Excellence, in his Nature, which he may reasonably despair
of ever arriving at; and in contemplating the latter, he may be no less
affected with those uneasy Sensations, at seeing the Nature, of which he is a
Partaker, degraded into so odious and detestable a Creature.

In Fact, if there be enough of Goodness in a Character to engage the
Admiration and Affection of a well-disposed Mind, though there should appear
some of those little Blemishes, quas humana parum cavit natura, they will raise
our Compassion rather than our Abhorrence. Indeed, nothing can be of more moral
Use than the Imperfections which are seen in Examples of this Kind; since such
form a Kind of Surprise, more apt to affect and dwell upon our Minds, than the
Faults of very vicious and wicked Persons. The Foibles and Vices of Men, in
whom there is great Mixture of Good, become more glaring Objects, from the
Virtues which contrast them, and which show their Deformity; and when we find
such Vices attended with their evil Consequence to our favorite Characters, we
are not only taught to shun them for our own Sake, but to hate them for the
Mischiefs they have already brought on those we love.

And now, my Friend, having given you these few Admonitions, we will, if you
please, once more set forward with our History.

CHAP. II. Containing the Arrival of an Irish Gentleman, with very
extraordinary Adventures which ensued at the Inn.
NOW the little trembling Hare, whom the Dread of all her numerous Enemies, and
chiefly of that cunning, cruel, carnivorous Animal Man, had confined all the
Day to her Lurking-place, sports wantonly over the Lawns: Now on some hollow
Tree the Owl, shrill Chorister of the Night, hoots forth Notes which might
Charm the Ears of some modern Conoisseurs in Music: Now in the Imagination of
the half-drunk Clown, as he staggars through the Churchyard, or rather
Charnal-yard, to his Home, Fear paints the bloody Hobgoblin: Now Thieves and
Ruffians are awake, and honest Watchmen fast asleep: In plain English, it was
now Midnight; and the Company at the Inn, as well those who have been already
mentioned in this History, as some others who arrived in the Evening, were all
in Bed. Susan Chambermaid, was now only stirring, she being obliged to wash the
Kitchen, before she retired to the Arms of the fond, expecting Ostler.

In this Posture were Affairs at the Inn, when a Gentleman arrived there Post.
He immediately alighted from his Horse, and coming up to Susan, enquired of her
in a very abrupt and confused Manner, being almost out of Breath with
Eagerness, whether there was any Lady in the House. The Hour of Night, and the
Behavior of the Man, who stared very wildly all the Time, a little surprised
Susan, so that she hesitated before she made any Answer: Upon which the
Gentleman, with redoubled Eagerness, begged her to give him a true Information,
saying, he had lost his 'Wife, and was come in Pursuit of her. 'Upon my Shoul,'
cries he, 'I have been near catching her already in two or three Places, if I
had not found her gone just as I came up with her.'

'If she be in the House, do carry me up in the Dark and show her to me; and if
she be gone away before me, do tell me which Way I shall go after her to meet
her, and upon my Shoul, I will make you the richest poor Woman in the Nation.'
He then pulled out a Handful of Guineas, a Sight which would have bribed
Persons of much greater Consequence than this poor Wench, to much worse
Purposes.

Susan, from the Account she had received of Mrs. Waters, made not the least
Doubt but that she was the very identical Stray whom the right owner pursued.
As she concluded, therefore, with great Appearance of Reason, that she never
could get Money in an honester Way than by restoring a Wife to her Husband, she
made no Scruple of assuring the Gentleman, that the Lady he wanted was then in
the House, and was presently afterward prevailed upon (by very liberal
Promises, and some Earnest paid into her Hands) to conduct him to the
Bedchamber of Mrs. Waters.

It has been a Custom long established in the polite World, and that upon very
solid and substantial Reasons, that a Husband shall never enter his Wife's
Apartment without first knocking at the Door. The many excellent Uses of this
Custom need scarce be hinted to a Reader who has any Knowledge of the World:
For by this Means the Lady has Time to adjust herself, or to remove any
disagreeable Object out of the Way; for there are some Situations, in which
nice and delicate Women would not be discovered by their Husbands.

To say the Truth, there are several Ceremonies instituted among the polished
Part of Mankind, which though they may, to coarser Judgments, appear as Matters
of mere Form, are found to have much of Substance in them, by the more
discerning; and lucky would it have been, had the Custom abovementioned been
observed by our Gentleman in the present Instance. Knock, indeed, he did at the
Door, but not with one of those gentle Raps which is usual on such Occasions.
On the contrary, when he found the Door locked, he flew at it with such
Violence, that the Lock immediately gave Way, the Door burst open, and he fell
headlong into the Room.

He had no sooner recovered his Legs, than forth from the Bed, upon his Legs
likewise appeared -- with Shame and Sorrow are we obliged to proceed -- our
Hero himself, who, with a menacing Voice, demanded of the Gentleman who he
was, and what he meant by daring to burst open his Chamber in that outrageous
Manner.

The Gentleman at first thought he had committed a ^istake, and was going to
ask Pardon and retreat, when, on a sudden, as the Moon shone very bright, ^e
cast his Eyes on Stays, Gowns, Petticoats, Caps, Ribbons, Stockings, Garters,
Shoes, Clogs, etc. ^ll which lay in a disordered Manner on the Floor. All these
operating on the natural Jealousy of his Temper, so enraged him, that he lost
all Power of Speech; and without returning any Answer to Jones, ^e endeavored
to approach the Bed.

Jones immediately interposing, a fierce Contention ^rose, which soon proceeded
to Blows on both Sides. And now Mrs. Waters (for we must confess she was ^n the
same Bed) being, I suppose, awakened from ^er Sleep, and seeing two Men
fighting in her Bedchamber, began to scream in the most violent Manner, crying
out Murder! Robbery! and more frequently Rape! which last, some, perhaps, may
wonder she should mention, who do not consider that these Words of Exclamation
are used by Ladies in a Fright, as Fa, la, la, ra, da, etc. are in Music, only
as the Vehicles of Sound, and without any fixed Ideas.

Next to the Lady's Chamber was deposited the Body of an Irish Gentleman, who
arrived too late at the Inn to have been mentioned before. This Gentleman was
one of those whom the Irish call a Calabalaro, or Cavalier. He was a younger
Brother of a good Family, and having no Fortune at Home, was obliged to look
abroad in order to get one: For which Purpose he was proceeding to the Bath to
try his Luck with Cards and the Women.

This young Fellow lay in Bed reading one of Mrs. Behn's Novels; for he had
been instructed by a Friend, that he would find no more effectual Method of
recommending himself to the Ladies than the improving his Understanding, and
filling his Mind with good Literature. He no sooner, therefore, heard the
violent Uproar in the next Room, than he leapt from hi^ Bolster, and taking his
Sword in one Hand, and the Candle which burnt by him in the other, he went
directly to Mrs. Waters's Chamber.

If the Sight of another Man in his Shirt at first added some Shock to the
Decency of the Lady, it mad her presently Amends by considerably abating he
Fears; for no sooner had the Calabalaro entered the Room, than he cried out:
'Mr. Fitzpatrick, wha^ the Devil is the Meaning of this?' Upon which the other
immediately answered, 'O, Mr. Macklachlan I am rejoiced you are here, -- This
Villain has debauched my Wife, and is got into Bed with her. -- 'What Wife?
cries Macklachlan, do not know Mrs. Fitzpatrick very well, and don't I se^ that
the Lady, whom the Gentleman who stand here in his Shirt is lying in Bed with,
is none o^ her?'

Fitzpatrick now perceiving, as well by the Glimps^ he had of the Lady, as by
her Voice, which might have been distinguished at a greater Distance than he
now stood from her, that he had made a very unfortunate Mistake, began to ask
many Pardons of the Lady; and then turning to Jones he said, 'I would have you
take Notice I do not ask your Pardon, for you have bate me; for which I am
resolved to have your Blood in the Morning.'

Jones treated this Menace with much Contempt; and Mr. Macklachlan answered,
'Indeed, Mr. Fitzpatrick, you may be ashamed of your ownself, to disturb People
at this Time of Night: If all the People in the Inn were not asleep, you would
have awakened them as you have me. The Gentleman has served you very rightly.
Upon my Conscience, though I have no Wife, if you had treated her so, I would
have cut your Throat.'

Jones was so confounded with his Fears for his Lady's Reputation, that he knew
neither what to say or do; but the Invention of Women is, as has been
observed, much readier than that of Men. She recollected that there was a
communication between her ^hamber and that of Mr. Jones; relying, therefore, ^n
his Honor and her own Assurance, she answered, I know not what you mean,
Villains! I am Wife to none of you. Help! Rape! Murder! Rape!' -- And now the
Landlady coming into the Room, Mrs. Waters fell upon her with the utmost
Virulence, ^^ying, 'She thought herself in a sober Inn, and not in a
Bawdy House; but that a Set of Villains had broke into her Room, with an Intent
upon her Honor, if not upon her Life; and both, she said, were equally dear to
her'.

The Landlady now began to roar as loudly as the ^oor Woman in Bed had done
before. She cried, She was undone, and that the Reputation of her House, which
was never blown upon before, was utterly destroyed.' Then turning to the Men,
she ^ry'd, 'What, in the Devil's Name, is the Reason of all this Disturbance in
the Lady's Room?' Fitzpatrick, hanging down his Head, repeated, 'that he had
committed a Mistake, for which he heartily asked Pardon,' and then retired with
his Countryman. Jones, who was too ingenious to have missed ^he Hint given him
by his Fair One, boldly asserted, That he had run to her Assistance upon
hearing the Door broke open; with what Design he could not conceive, unless of
robbing the Lady; which if they intended, he said, he had had the good Fortune
to prevent. "I never had a Robbery committed in my House since I have kept it,'
cries the Landlady: I would have you to know, Sir, I harbor no Highwaymen
here; I scorn the Word, thof I say it. None but honest, good Gentlefolks, are
welcome to my House; and I thank good Luck, I have always had enough of such
Customers; indeed as many as I could entertain. Here has been my Lord -- ' and
then she repeated over a Catalogue of Name and Titles, many of which we might,
perhaps, b^ guilty of a Breach of Privilege by inserting.

Jones, after much Patience, at length interrupted her, by making an Apology to
Mrs. Waters, for having appeared before her in his Shirt, assuring her 'That
nothing but a Concern for her Safety could have prevailed on him to do it.' The
Reader man inform himself of her Answer, and, indeed, of h^ whole Behavior to
the End of the Scene, by considering the Situation which she affected, being
that of modest Lady, who was awakened out of her Slee^ by three strange Men in
her Chamber. This was the Part which she undertook to perform; and, indeed she
executed it so well, that none of our Theatric^ Actresses could exceed her, in
any of their Performances, either on or off the Stage.

And hence, I think, we may very fairly draw a^ Argument, to prove how
extremely natural Virtue i^ to the Fair Sex: For though there is not, perhaps,
on^ in ten thousand who is capable of making a good Actress; and even among
these we rarely see two wh^ are equally able to personate the same Character;
y^^ this of Virtue they can all admirably well put on; an^ as well those
Individuals who have it not, as thos^ who possess it, can all act it to the
utmost Degree o^ Perfection.

When the Men were all departed, Mrs. Water recovering from her Fear, recovered
likewise from her Anger, and spoke in much gentler Accents to the Landlady, who
did not so readily quit her Concern for the Reputation of the House, in Favor
of which she began again to number the many great Person^ who had slept under
her Roof; but the Lady stopped he^ short, and having absolutely acquitted her of
having had any Share in the past Disturbance, begged to b^ left to her Repose,
which, she said, she hoped to enjoy unmolested during the Remainder of the
Night Upon which the Landlady, after much Civility, and ^any Curt'sies, took
her Leave.

CHAP. III. ^ Dialogue between the Landlady, and Susan the Chambermaid, proper
to be read by all Innkeepers, and their Servants; with the Arrival, and affable
Behavior of a beautiful young Lady; which may teach Persons of Condition how
they may acquire the Love of the whole World.
THE Landlady remembering that Susan had been the only Person out of Bed when
the Door was ^urst open, resorted presently to her, to enquire into ^he first
Occasion of the Disturbance, as well as who ^he strange Gentleman was, and when
and how he ^^ived.

Susan related the whole Story which the Reader ^nows already, varying the
Truth only in some Circumstances, as she saw convenient, and totally concealing
the Money which she had received. But whereas her Mistress had in the Preface
to her Enquiry spoken much in Compassion for the Fright which the Lady had been
in concerning any intended Depredations on her Virtue, Susan could not help
endeavoring to quiet the Concern which her Mistress seemed to be under on that
Account, by swear^ng heartily she saw Jones leap out from her Bed.

The Landlady fell into a violent Rage at these Words. 'A likely Story truly,'
cried she, 'that a Woman should cry out, and endeavor to expose herself, if
that was the Case! I desire to know what better Proof any Lady can give of her
Virtue than her crying out, which, I believe, twenty People can witness for her
she did? I beg, Madam, you would spread no such Scandal of any of my Guests:
For it will not only reflect on them, but upon the House, and I am sure no
Vagabonds, nor wicked beggarly People come here.'

'Well,' says Susan, 'then I must not believe my own Eyes.' 'No, indeed must
you not always,' answered her Mistress, 'I would not have believed my own Eyes
against such good Gentlefolks. I have not had a better Supper ordered this half
Year than they ordered last Night, and so easy and good humoured were they,
that they found no Fault with my Worcestershire Perry, which I sold them for
Champagne; and to be sure it is as well tasted, and as wholesome as the best
Champagne in the Kingdom, otherwise I would scorn to give it 'em, and they
drank me two Bottles. No, no, I will never believe any Harm of such sober good
Sort of People.'

Susan being thus silenced, her Mistress proceeded to other Matters. 'And so
you tell me,' continued she 'That the strange Gentleman came Post, and there is
a Footman without with the Horses; why then, he is certainly some of your great
Gentlefolks too. Why did not you ask him whether he would have any Supper? I think
he is in the other Gentleman's Room, go up and ask whether he called. Perhaps
he will order something when he find any Body stirring in the House to dress it.
Now don't commit any of your usual Blunders, by telling him the Fire's out, and
the Fowls alive. And if he should order Mutton, don't blab out, that we have
none. The Butcher, I know, killed a Sheep just before I went to Bed, and he
never refuses to cut it up warm when I desire it. Go, remember there is all Sort
of Mutton and Fowls; go, open the Door, with Gentlemen do you call, and if they
say nothing, ask what his Honor will be pleased to have for Supper. Don't
forget his Honor Go; if you don't mind all these Matters better you will never
come to any Thing.'

Susan departed, and soon returned with an Account that the two Gentlemen were
got both into the sam^ Bed, 'Two Gentlemen,' says the Landlady, 'i^ the same
Bed! that is impossible, they are two errant Scrubs, I warrant them, and, I
believe, young Squire Allworthy guessed right, that the Fellow intended to rob
her Ladyship: For if he had broke open the Lady's Door with any of the wicked
Designs of a Gentleman, he would never have sneaked away to another Room to
save the Expense of a Supper and a Bed to himself. They are certainly Thieves,
and their searching after a Wife is nothing but a Pretense.'

In these Censures, my Landlady did Mr. Fitzpa^ick great Injustice; for he was
really born a Gentleman, though not worth a Groat; and though, perhaps, ^e had
some few Blemishes in his Heart as well as ^n his Head, yet being a sneaking,
or a niggardly Fellow, was not one of them. In reality, he was so generous a
Man, that whereas he had received a very ^andsome Fortune with his Wife, he had
now spent every Penny of it, except some little Pittance which was settled upon
her; and in order to possess himself ^f this, he had used her with such
Cruelty, that together with his Jealousy, which was of the bitterest ^ind, it
had forced the poor Woman to run away from him.

This Gentleman then being well tired with his long ^ourney from Chester in one
Day, with which, and ^ome good dry Blows, he had received in the Scuffle, ^is
Bones were so sore, that added to the Soreness of ^^s Mind, it had quite
deprived him of any Appetite for eating. And now being so violently
disappointed ^n the Woman, whom at the Maid's Instance, he had mistaken for his
Wife, it never once entered into ^is Head, that she might nevertheless be in
the House, though he had erred in the first Person he had attacked. He
therefore yielded to the Dissuasions of his Friend from searching any farther
after her that Night, and accepted the Kind offer of Part of his Bed.

The Footman and Post-boy were in a differ^^^ Disposition. They were more ready
to order th^^ the Landlady was to provide; however, after bei^^ pretty well
satisfied by them of the real Truth of ^^ Case, and that Mr. Fitzpatrick was no
Thief, ^ was at length prevailed on to set some cold M^ before them, which they
were devouring with gr^ Greediness, when Partridge came into the Kitch^ He had
been first awakened by the Hurry which ^ have before seen, and while he was
endeavoring compose himself again on his Pillow, a Screech-O^ had given him
such a Serenade at his Window, that leapt in a most horrible Affright from his
Bed, ^ huddling on his Clothes with great Expedition, ^ down to the Protection
of the Company, whom heard talking below in the Kitchen.

His Arrival detained my Landlady from returni^^ to her Rest: For she was just
about to leave the there two Guests to the Care of Susan; but the Fri^ of young
Squire Allworthy was not to be so neglect especially as he called for a Pint of
Wine to be ^^ led. She immediately obeyed, by putting the sa^ Quantity of Perry
to the Fire: For this readily swered to the Name of every Kind of Wine.

The Irish Footman was retired to Bed, and Post-Boy was going to follow; but
Partridge vited him to stay, and partake of his Wine, which Lad very thankfully
accepted. The Schoolma^ was indeed afraid to return to Bed by himself; an^ he
did not know how soon he might lose the Company of my Landlady, he was resolved
to secure of the Boy, in whose Presence he apprehended Danger from the Devil,
or any of his Adherents.

And now arrived another Post-Boy at the G^ upon which Susan being ordered out,
returned; troducing two young Women in Riding-habits, of which was so very
richly laced, that Partridge the Post-boy instantly started from their Chairs,
and my Landlady fell to her Curt'sies, and her Ladyships, with great Eagerness.

The Lady in the rich Habit said, with a Smile of great Condescension, 'If you
will give me Leave, Madam, I will warm myself a few Minutes at your Kitchen
Fire, for it is really very cold; but I must insist on disturbing no one from
their Seats.' This was spoken on Account of Partridge, who had retreated to the
other End of the Room, struck with the utmost Awe and Astonishment at the
Splendour of the Lady's dress. Indeed she had a much better Title to Respect
than this: For she was one of the most beautiful Creatures in the World.

The Lady earnestly desired Partridge to return to his Seat, but could not
prevail. She then pulled off her Gloves, and displayed two Hands, which had
every Property of Wax in them, except that of melting, to the Fire. Her
Companion, who was indeed her Maid, likewise pulled off her Gloves, and
discovered what bore an exact Resemblance, in Cold and Color, ^o a Piece of
frozen Beef.

'I wish, Madam,' quoth the latter, 'your Ladyship would not think of going any
farther to Night. I am terribly afraid your Ladyship will not be able to bear
the Fatigue.

'Why sure,' cries the Landlady,' 'her Ladyship's Honor can never intend it. O
bless me, farther, to Night indeed! Let me beseech your Ladyship not to think
on it -- But to be sure, your Ladyship cannot. What will your Honor be pleased
to have for Supper? I have Mutton of all Kinds, and some nice Chicken.' --

'I think, Madam,' said the Lady, 'it would be rather Breakfast than Supper;
but I cannot eat any Thing, and if I stay, shall only lie down for an Hour or
two. However, if you please, Madam, you may get me a little Sack-Whey made very
small and thin.'

'Yes, Madam,' cries the Mistress of the House, I have some excellent
White Wind. 'You have no Sack then,' says the Lady. 'Yes, an't please your
Honor, I have; I may challange the Country for that -- But let me beg your
Ladyship to eat something.'

'Upon my Word, I cannot eat a Morsel,' answerred the Lady; 'and I shall be much
obliged to you, if you will please to get my Apartment ready as soon as
possible: For I am resolved to be o^ Horseback again in three Hours.'

'Why Susan,' cries the Landlady, 'is there a Fir^ lit yet in the Wild-goose?
-- I am sorry, Madam, al^ my Best Rooms are full. Several People of the first
Quality are now in Bed. Here Is a great youn^ Squire, and a many other great
Gentlefolks of Quality.'

Susan answered, 'That the Irish Gentlemen were got into the Wild-goose.'

'Was ever any Thing like it,' says the Mistress 'why the Devil would you not
keep some of the be^ Rooms for the Quality, when you know scarce, Day passes
without some calling here? -- If they b^ Gentlemen, I am certain, when they
know it is for her Ladyship, they will get up again.'

'Not upon my Account,' says the Lady. 'I wi^^ have no Person disturbed for me.
If you have Room that is commonly decent, it will serve n^^ very well, though
it be never so plain. I beg, Madam, you will not give yourself so much Troub^
on my Account. OF Madam,' cries the other I have several very good Rooms for
that Matte^ but none good enough for your Honor's Ladyship However, as you are
so condescending to take u^ with the best I have, do, Susan, get a Fire in the
Rose this Minute. Will your Ladyship be please to go up now, or stay till the
Fire is lighted? I think, I have, sufficiently warmed myself,' answered the
Lady, 'so if you please I will go now; I am afraid I have kept People, and
particularly that Gentleman (meaning Partridge) too long in the Cold already.
Indeed I cannot bear to think of keeping any Person from the Fire this dreadful
Weather.' She then departed with her Maid, the Landlady marching with two
lighted Candles before her.

When that good Woman returned, the Conversation in the Kitchen was all upon
the Charms of the young Lady. There is indeed in perfect Beauty a Power which
none almost can withstand: For my Landlady, though she was not pleased at the
Negative given to the Supper, declared she had never seen so lovely a Creature.
Partridge ran out into the most extravagant Encomiums on her Face, though he
could not refrain from paying some Compliments to the Gold Lace on her Habit:
the Post-boy sung forth the Praises of her Goodness, which were likewise echoed
by the other Post-boy, who was now come in. 'She's a true good Lady, I warrant
her,' says he: For she has Mercy upon dumb Creatures; for she asked me every
now and tan upon the Journey, if I did not think she should hurt the Horses by
riding too fast; and when she came in, she charged me to give them as much Corn
as ever they would eat.'

Such Charms are there in Affability, and so sure is it to attract the Praises
of all Kinds of People. It may indeed be compared to the celebrated Mrs. Hussy
A celebrated Mantua-maker in the Strand, famous for setting off the Shapes of
Women.
. It is equally sure to set off every Female Perfection to the highest
Advantage, and to palliate and conceal every Defect. A short Reflection which
we could not forbear making in this Place, where my Reader has seen the
Loveliness of an affable Deportment; and Truth will now oblige us to contrast
it, by showing the Reverse.

CHAP. IV. Containing infallible Nostrums for procuring universal Disesteem and
Hatred.
THE Lady had no sooner laid herself on her Pillow, than the Waiting Woman
returned to the Kitchen to regale with some of those Dainties which her
Mistress had refused.

The Company at her Entrance, showed her the same Respect which they had before
paid to her Mistress, by rising; but she forgot to imitate her, by desiring
them to sit down again. Indeed it was scarce possible they should have done so:
For she placed her Chain in such a Posture, as almost to occupy the whole Fire.
She then ordered a Chicken to be broiled that Instant, declaring if it was not
ready in a Quarter of an Hour, she would not stay for it. Now though the said
Chicken was then at Roost in the stable, and required the several Ceremonies of
catching, killing, and picking, before it was brought to the Grid-iron, my
Landlady would nevertheless have undertaken to do all within the Time; but the
Guest being unfortunately admitted behind the Scenes, must have been Witness to
the Fourberie, the poor Woman was therefore obliged to confess that she had
none in the House; but, Madam, said she, 'I can get any kind of Mutton in an
Instant from the Butcher's.'

'Do you think then,' answered the Waiting Gentlewoman, 'that I have the
Stomach of a Horse to eat Mutton at this Time of Night? Sure you People that
keep Inns imagine your Betters are like yourselves. Indeed I expected to get
nothing at this wretched place. I wonder my Lady would stop at it. I suppose
none but Tradesmen and Grasiers ever call here.' The Landlady fired at ^is
Indignity offered to her House; however she supressed her Temper, and contented
herself with saying, 'Very good Quality frequented it, she thanked Heaven!'
Don't tell me,' cries the other, 'of Quality! I believe I know more of People
of Quality than such as you. -- But, prithee, without troubling me with any of
your Impertinence, do tell me what I can have for Supper; for though I connot eat
Horseflesh, I am really hungry.' 'Why truly, Madam,' answered the Landlady,
'you could not have taken me again at such a Disadvantage: For I must confess,
I have nothing in the House, unless a cold Piece of Beef, which indeed a
Gentlewoman's Footman, and the Post-boy, have almost cleared to the Bone.'
Woman, said Mrs. Abigail (so for Shortness we will call her) I entreat you not
to make me sick. If I had fasted a Month, I could not eat what had been touched
by the Fingers of such Fellows: Is there nothing neat or decent to be had in
this horrid Place?' 'What think you of some Eggs and Bacon, Madam,' said the
Landlady. 'Are your Eggs new laid? Are you certain they were laid Today? And
let me have the Bacon cut very nice and thin; for I cannot endure any Thing
that is gross. -- Prithee, try if you can do a little tolerably for once, and
don't think you have a Farmer's Wife, or some of those Creatures in the House.'
-- The Landlady begun then to handle her Knife; but the other stopped her,
saying, 'Good Woman, I must insist upon your first washing your Hands; for I am
extremely nice, and have been always used from my Cradle to have every thing in
the most elegant Manner.'

The Landlady, who governed herself with much Difficulty, began now the
necessary Preprerations; for as to Susan, she was utterly rejected, and with
such Disdain, that the poor Wench was as hard put to it, to restrain her Hands
from Violence, as her Mistress had been to hold her Tongue. This indeed Susan
did not entirely: For though she literally kept it within her Teeth, yet there it
muttered many 'marry-come-ups, as good Flesh and Blood as yourself, with other
such indignant Phrases.'

While the Supper was preparing, Mrs Abigail began to lament she had not
ordered a Fire in the Parlour; but she said, that was now too late. 'However,
said she, 'I have Novelty to recommend a Kitchen, for I do not believe I ever
eat in one before.' Then turning to the Post-Boys, she asked them, 'Why they
were not in the Stable with their Horses? If I must eat my hard Fare here,
Madam,' cries she to the Landlady, 'I beg the Kitchen may be kept clear, that I
may not be surrounded with all the Black-guards in Town; as for you, Sir,' says
she to Partridge, 'you look somewhat like a Gentleman, and may sit still if you
please, I don't desire to disturb any body but Mob.'

'Yes, yes, Madam, cries Partridge, 'I am a Gentleman, I do assure you, and I
am not so easily to be disturbed. Non semper vox causalis est verbo
nominativus.' This Latin she took to be some Affront, and answered, 'You may be
a Gentleman, Sir, but you don't show yourself as one, to talk Latin to a
Wonan.' Partridge made a genteel Reply, and concluded with more Latin; upon
which she tossed up her Nose, and contented herself by abusing him with the
Name of a great Scholar.

The Supper being now on the Table, Mrs. Abigail eat very heartily, for so
delicate a Person; and while a second Course of the same was by her Order
preparing, she said, 'And so, Madam, you tell me your 'House is frequented by
People of great Quality.'

The Landlady answered in the Affirmative, saying, 'There were a great many
very good Quality and Gentlefolks in it now. There Is young Squire Allworthy, as
that Gentleman there knows.'

'And pray who is this young Gentleman of Quality, this young Squire
Allworthy?' said Abigail.

'Who should he be,' answered Partridge, 'but the Son and Heir of the great
Squire Allworthy of Somersetshire.'

'Upon my Word,' said she, 'you tell me strange News: For I know Mr. Allworthy
of Somersetshire very well, and I know he has no Son alive.'

The Landlady pricked up her Ears at this, and Partridge looked a little
confounded. However, after a short Hesitatation, he answered, 'Indeed, Madam,
it is true, every body does not know him to be Squire Allworthy's Son; for he
was never married to his Mother; but his Son he certainly is, and will be his
Heir too as certainly as his Name is Jones.' At that Word, Abigail let drop the
Bacon, which she was conveying to her Mouth, and cried out, 'You surprise me,
Sir. Is it possible Mr. Jones should be now in the House?' 'Quare non?'
answered Partridge, 'it is possible, and it is certain.

Abigail now made Haste to finish the Remainder of her Meal, and then repaired
back to her Mistress, when the Conversation passed, which may be read in the
next Chapter.

CHAP. V. Showing who the amiable Lady, and her unamiable Maid, were.
AS in the Month of June, the Damask Rose, which Chance has planted among the
Lillies with their candid Hue mixes his Vermilion: Or, as some play-some Heifer
in the pleasant Month of May diffuses her oderiferous Breath over the flowery
Meadows: Or as, in the blooming Month of April, the gentle, constant Dove,
perched on some fair Bough, sits meditating her Mate; so looking a hundred
Charms, and breathing as many Sweets, her Thoughts being fixed on her Tommy,
with a Heart as good and innocent, as her Face was beautiful: Sophia (for it
was she herself) lay reclining her lovely Head on her Hand, when her Maid
entered the Room, and running directly to the Bed, cried, 'Madam -- Madam --
who does your Ladyship think is in the House?' Sophia starting up, cried, 'I
hope my Father has not overtaken us.' 'No, Madam, it is one worth a hundred
Fathers; Mr. Jones himself is here at this very Instant.' Mr. Jones!' says
Sophia, 'it is impossible, I cannot be so fortunate.' Her Maid averred the
Fact, and was presently detached by her Mistress to order him to be called; for
she said she was resolved to see him immediately.

Mrs. Honor had no sooner left the Kitchen in the Manner we have before seen,
than the Landlady fell severely upon her. The poor Woman had indeed been
loading her Heart with foul Language for some Time, and now it scoured out of
her Mouth as Filth does from a Mud-Cart, when the Board which consines it is
removed. Partridge, likewise shovelled in his share of Calumny; and (what may
surprise the Reader) not only bespattered the Maid, but attempted to fully the
Lilly-white Character of Sophia herself 'Never a Barrel the better Herring,'
cries he, 'Noscitur a socio, is a true Saying. It must be confessed indeed that
the Lady in the fine Garment is the civiller of the two; but I warrant neither
o^ them are a Bit better than they should be. A Coupl^ of Bath Trulls, I Will
answer for them; your Qualit^ don't ride about at this Time o'Night without
Servants.' 'Sbodlikins, and that is true,' cries the Landlady, 'you have
certainly hit upon the very Matter; for Quality don't come into a House without
bespeaking a Supper, whether they eat or no.'

While they were thus discoursing, Mrs. Honor returned, and discharged her
Commission, by bidding the Landlady immediately awake Mr. Jones, and tell him a
Lady wanted to speak with him. The Landlady referred to Partridge, saying, 'he
was the Squire's Friend; but, for her Part, she never called Men Folks,
especially Gentlemen,' and then walked sullenly out of the Kitchen. Honor
applied herself to Partridge; but he refused; 'For my Friend,' cries he, 'went
to Bed very late, and he would be very angry to be disturbed so soon.' Mrs.
Honor insisted still to have him called, saying, 'She was sure, instead of
being angry, that he would be to the highest Degree delighted when he knew the
Occasion.' Another Time, perhaps, he might,' cries Partridge; 'but non omnia
possumus omnes. One Woman is enough at once for a reasonrble Man.? What do you
mean by one Woman, Fellow,' cries Honor? None of your Fellow,' answered
Partridge. He then proceeded to inform her plainly, that Jones was in Bed with
a Wench, and made use of an Expression too indelicate to be here inserted;
which so enraged Mrs. Honor, that she called him saucy Jackanapes, and
returned in a violent Hurry to her Mistress, whom she acquainted with the
Success of her Errand, and with the Account she had received; which, if
possible, she exaggerated, being as angry with Jones, as if he had pronounced
all the Words that came from the Mouth of Partridge. She discharged a Torrent
of Abuse on the Master, and advised her Mistress to quit all Thoughts of a Man
who had never shown himself deserving of her. She then ripped up the Story of
Molly Seagrim, and gave the most malicious Turn to his formerly quitting Sophia
herself; which, I must confess, the present Incident not a littl countenanced.

The Spirits of Sophia were too much dissipated by Concern to enable her to
stop the Torrent of her Maid. At last, however, she interrupted her, saying, 'I
never can believe this; some Villain has belied him. You say you had it from
his Friend; but surely it is not the Office of a Friend to betray such
Secrets.' 'I suppose,' cries Honor, 'the Fellow is his Pimp, for I never saw
so ill-looked a Villain. Besides, such profligate Rakes as Mr. Jones, are never
ashamed of these Matters.'

To say the Truth, this Behavior of Partridge was a little inexcusable; but he
had not slept off the Effect of the Dose which he swallowed the Evening before;
which had in the Morning, received the Addition of about a Pint of Wine, or
indeed rather of Malt Spirits; for the Perry was by no Means pure. Now that
Part of his Head which Nature designed for the Reservoir of Drink, being very
shallow, a small Quantity of Liquor overflowed it, and opened the Sluices of
his Heart; so that all the Secrets there deposited run out. These Sluices were
indeed naturally very ill secured. To give the best natured Turn we can to his
disposition, he was a very honest Man: for as he was the most inquisitive of
Mortals, and eternally prying into the Secrets of others, so he very faithfully
paid them by communicating, in Return, every thing within his Knowledge.

While Sophia tormented with Anxiety, knew not what to believe, nor what
Resolution to take, Susan arrived with the Sack-Whey. Mrs. Honor immediately
advised her Mistress, in a Whisper to pump this Wench, who probably could
inform her of the Truth. Sophia approved it, and began as follows: 'Come
hither, Child, now answer me truly what I am going to ask you, and I promise
you I will very well reward you. Is there a young Gentleman in' this House, a
handsome young Gentleman that -- Here Sophia blushed and was confounded -- 'A
young Gentleman,' cries Honor, 'that came hither in Company with that fancy
Rascal who is now in the Kitchen?' Susan answered, 'There was' -- 'Do you know
any Thing of any Lady,' continues Sophia, 'any Lady? I don't ask you whether
she is handsome or no; perhaps she is not, that is nothing to the Purpose, but
do you know of any Lady?' La, Madam, cries Honor, you will make a very bad
Examiner. Harkee, Child,' says she, 'Is not that very young Gentleman now in
Bed with' some nasty Trull or other? Here Susan smiled, and was silent. 'Answer
the Question, Child, says Sophia, 'and here is a Guinea for you.' 'A Guinea!
Madam, cries Susan; 'La, what is a Guinea? If my Mistress should know it, I
shall certainly lose my Place that very Instant.' 'Here's another for you,'
says Sophia, 'and I promise you faithfully your Mistress shall never know it.'
Susan, after a very short Hesitation, took the Money, and told his whole Story,
concluding with saying, 'If you have a great Curiosity, Madam, I can steal
softly into the Room, and see whether he be in his own Bed or no.' She
accordingly did this by Sophia's Desire, and returned with an Answer in the
Negative.

Sophia now trembled and turned pale. Mrs. Honor begged her to be comforted,
and not to think any more of so worthless a Fellow. 'Why there,' says Susan, 'I
hope Madam, your Ladyship will not be offended; but pray Madam, is not your
Ladyship's Name Madam Sophia Western?' 'How is it possible you should know me?
answered Sophia. 'Why that Man that the Gentlewoman spoke of, who is in the
Kitchen, told about you last Night. But I hope your Ladyship is not angry with
me.' 'Indeed, Child,' said she, 'I am not; pray tell me all, and I promise you