Kitchen, that Madam Sophia Western -- Indeed I don't know how to bring it out.'
-- Here she stopped, till having received Encouragement from Sophia, and being
vehemently pressed by Mrs. Honor, she proceeded thus: -- 'He told us, Madam,
though to be sure it is all a Lie, that your Ladyship was dying for Love of the
young Squire, and that he was going to the Wars to get rid of you. I thought to
myself then he was a false-hearted Wretch; but now to see such a fine, rich,
beautiful Lady as you be forsaken for such an ordinary Woman; for to be sure so
she is, and another Man's Wife into the Bargain. It is such a strange unnatural
thing, in a Manner.'

Sophia gave her a third Guinea, and telling her she would certainly be her
Friend, if she mentioned nothing of what had passed, nor informed any one who
she was, dismissed the Girl with Orders to the Post-Boy to get the Horses ready
immediately.

Being now left alone with her Maid, she told her trusty Waiting Woman, 'That
she never was more easy than at present. I am now convinced,' said she, 'he is
not only a Villain, but a low despicable Wretch. I can forgive all rather than
his exposing my Name in so barbarous a Manner. That renders him the Object of
my Contempt. Yes, Honor, I am now easy. I am indeed. I am very easy, and then
she burst into a violent Flood o^ Tears.'

After a short Interval, spent chiefly by Sophia, i^ crying and assuring her
Maid that she was perfectly easy, Susan arrived with an Account that the Horse^
were ready, when a very extraordinary Thought suggested itself to our young
Heroine, by which Mr. Jones would be acquainted with her having been a^ the
Inn, in a Way, which, if any Sparks of Affection for her remained in him, would
be some Punishment, at least, for his Faults.

The Reader will be pleased to remember a little Muff, which has had the
Honor of being more than once remembered already in this History. Thi^ Muff,
ever since the Departure of Mr. Jones, ha^^ been the constant companion of
Sophia by Day, and her Bedfellow by Night, and this Muff she had at this very
Instant upon her Arm; whence she took it off with great Indignation, and having
writ her Name with her Pencil upon a Piece of Paper which she pinned to it, she
bribed the Maid to convey it into the empty Bed of Mr. Jones, in which if he
did not find it, she charged her to take some Method of conveying it before his
Eyes in the Morning.

Then having paid for what Mrs. Honor had eaten, in which Bill was included an
Account for what she herself might have eaten, she mounted her Horse, and once
more assuring her Companion that she was perfectly easy, continued her Journey.

CHAP. VI. Containing, among other Things, the Ingenuity of Partridge, the
Madness of Jones, and the Folly of Fitzpatrick.
IT was now past Five in the Morning, and other Company began to rise and come
to the Kitchen, among whom were the Sergeant and the Coachman, who being
thoroughly reconciled, made a Libation, or, in the English Phrase, drank a
hearty Cup together.

In this Drinking nothing more remarkable happened, than the Behavior of
Partridge, who, when the Sergeant drank a Health to King George, repeated only
the Word King: Nor could he be brought to utter more: For though he was going to
sight against his own Cause, yet he could not be prevailed upon to drink
against it.

Mr. Jones being now returned to his own Bed (but from whence we returned he
must beg to be excused from relating) summoned Partridge from this agreeable
Company, who, after a ceremonious Preface, having obtained leave to offer his
Advice, delivered himself as follows:

'It is, Sir, an old Saying, and a true one, that a wise Man may sometimes
learn Council from a Fool; wish therefore I might be so bold as to offer you my
Advice, which is to return home again and leave these Horrida Bella, these
bloody Wars to Fellows who are contented to swallow Gunpowder, because they
have nothing to eat. Now every body knows your Honor wants for nothing at
home; when that is the Case, why should any Man travel abroad?'

'Partridge,' cries Jones, 'thou art certainly a Coward, I wish therefore thou
would return home thyself, and trouble me no more.'

'I ask your Honor's Pardon,' cries Partridge, 'I spoke on your Account more
than my own; for as to me, Heaven knows my Circumstances are bad enough, and I
am so far from being afraid, that I value a Pistol, or a Blunderbuss, or any
such Thing, no more than a Pop-gun. Every Man must die once, and what signifies
the Manner how; besides, perhaps, I may come off with the Loss only of an Arm
or a Leg. I assure you, Sir, I was never less afraid in my Life; and so if your
Honor is resolved to go on, I am resolved to follow you. But, in that Case, I
wish I might give my Opinion. To be sure it is a scandalous Way of traveling,
for a great Gentleman like you to walk afoot. Now here are two or three good
Horses in the Stable, which the Landlord will certainly make no Scruple of
trusting you with; but if he should, I can easily contrive to take them, and
let the worst come to the worst, the King would certainly pardon you, as you
are going to fight in his Cause.'

Now as the Honesty of Partridge was equal to his Understanding, and both dealt
only in small Matters, he would never have attempted a Roguery of this Kind,
had he not imagined it altogether safe; for he was one of those who have more
consideration of the Gallows than of the Fitness of Things; but in Reality, he
thought he might have committed this Felony without any Danger: For, besides
that he doubted not but the Name of Mr. Allworthy would sufficiently quiet the
Landlord, he conceived they should be altogether safe, whatever Turn Affairs
might take; as Jones, he imagined, would have Friends enough on one Side, and
as his Friends would as well secure him on the other.

When Mr. Jones found that Partridge was in earnest in this Proposal, he very
severely rebuked him, and that in such bitter Terms that the other attempted to
laugh it off, and presently turned the Discourse to other Matters, saying, he
believed they were then in a Bawdy House, and that he had with much ado
prevented two Wenches from disturbing his Honor in the middle of the Night.
'Heyday!' says he, 'I believe they got into your Chamber whether I would or no,
for here lies the Muff of one of them on the Ground.' Indeed, as Jones returned
to his Bed in the Dark, he had never perceived the Muff on the Quilt, and in
leaping into his Bed he had tumbled it on the Floor. This Partridge now took
up, and was going to put into his Pocket, when Jones desired to see it. The
Muff was so very remarkable, that our Hero might possibly have recollected it
without the Information annexed. But his Memory was not put to that hard
Office, for at the same Instant he saw and read the Words Sophia Western upon
the Paper which was pinned to it. His Looks now grew frantic in a Moment, and
he eagerly cried out, 'Oh Heavens, how came this Muff here!' 'I know no more
than your Honor,' cried Partridge; 'but I saw it upon the Arm of one of the
Women who would have disturbed you, if I would have suffered them.' 'Where are
they?' cries Jones, jumping out of Bed, and laying hold of his Clothes. 'Many
Miles off, I believe,' by this Time,' said Partridge. And now Jones, upon
further Enquiry, was sufficiently assured that the Bearer of this Muff was no
other than the lovely Sophia herself.

The Behavior of Jones on this Occasion. His Thoughts, his Looks, his Words,
his Actions, were such as Beggar all Description. After many bitter Execrations
on Partridge, and not fewer on himself, he ordered the poor Fellow, who was
frightened out of his Wits, to run down and hire him Horses at any rate; and a
very few Minutes afterward, having shuffled on his Clothes, he hastened down
Stairs to execute the Orders himself, which he had just before given.

But before we proceed to what passed on his Arrival in the Kitchen, it will be
necessary to recur to what had there happened since Partridge had first left it
on his Master's Summons.

The Sergeant was just marched off with his Party when the two Irish Gentlemen
arose and came down Stairs; both complaining, that they had been so often waked
by the Noises in the Inn, that they had never once been able to close their
Eyes all Night.

The Coach, which had brought the young Lady and her Maid, and which, perhaps,
the Reader may have hitherto concluded was her own, was indeed a returned Coach
belonging to Mr. King of Bath, one of the worthiest and honestest Men that ever
dealt in Horseflesh, and whose Coaches we heartily recommend to all our
Readers who travel that Road. By which Means they may, perhaps, have the
Pleasure of riding in the very Coach, and being driven by the very Coachman,
that is recorded in this History.

The Coachman having but two Passengers, and hearing Mr. Maclachlan was bound
to Bath, offered to carry him thither at a very moderate Price. He was induced
to this by the Report of the Ostler, who said, that the Horse which Mr.
Maclachlan had hired from Worcester, would be much more pleased with re^^rning
to his Friend there, than to prosecute a long ^ourney; for that the said Horse
was rather a two^^gged than a four-legged Animal.

Mr. Maclachlan immediately closed with the Proposal of the Coachman, and, at
the same Time, per^aded his Friend Fitzpatrick to accept of the fourth ^lace in
the Coach. This Conveyance the Soreness ^f his Bones made more agreeable to him
than a Horse, and being well assured of meeting with his Wife at ^ath, he
thought a little Delay would be of no Con^equence.

Maclachlan, who was much the sharper Man of the ^wo, no sooner heard that this
Lady came from Ches^r, with the other Circumstances which he learned from the
Ostler, than it came into his Head that she ^ight possibly be his Friend's
Wife; and presently ac^uainted him with this Suspicion, which had never ^nce
occurred to Fitzpatrick himself. To say the truth, he was one of those
Compositions which Na^^re makes up in two great a Hurry, and forgets to at any
Brains in their Head.

Now it happens to this sort of Men, as to bad ^ounds, who never hit off a
Fault themselves; but no ^oner does a Dog of Sagacity open his Mouth, than ^ey
immediately do the same, and without the Guide ^ any Scent, run directly
forwards as fast as they are ^le. In the same Manner, the very Moment Mr.
Maclachlan had mentioned his Apprehension, Mr. Fitzpatrick instantly concurred,
and flew directly up ^airs to surprise his Wife before he knew where she ^as;
and unluckily (as Fortune loves to play Tricks ^ith those Gentlemen who put
themselves entirely un^r her Conduct) ran his Head against several Doors ^^d
Posts to no Purpose. Much kinder was she to (...), when she suggested that
Simile of the Hounds, (...) before inserted, since the poor Wife may, on these,
Occasions, be so justly compared to a hunted Hare. Like that little wretched
Animal she pricks up her Ears to listen after the Voice of her Pursuer; like
her, flies away trembling when she hears it; and like her, is generally
overtaken and destroyed in the End.

This was not however the Case at present; for after a long fruitless Search,
Mr. Fitzpatrick returned to the Kitchen, where, as if this had been a rea^
Chase, entered a Gentleman hallowing as Hunter do when the Hounds are at Fault.
He was just a lighting from his Horse, and had many Attendants a^ his Heels.

Here, Reader, it may be necessary to acquaint the^ with some Matters, which,
if thou do know already thou art wiser than I take thee to be. And this
Information thou shall receive in the next Chapter.

CHAP. VII. In which are included the Adventures that happened a the Inn at
Upton.
IN the first Place then, this Gentleman just arrive^ was no other Person than
Squire Western himself who was come hither in Pursuit of his Daughter; an^ had
he fortunately been two Hours earlier, he had no^ only found her, but his Neice
into the Bargain; for such was the Wife of Mr. Fitzpatrick, who had ru^ away
with her five Years before, out of the Custod^ of that sage Lady Madam Western.

Now this Lady had departed from the Inn much about at the same Time with
Sophia: For having bee^ waked by the Voice of her Husband, she had sent u^ for
the Landlady, and being by her apprized of the Matter, had bribed the good
Woman, at an extravagant Price, to furnish her with Horses for her e^cape. Such
Prevalence had Money in this Family and though the Mistress would have turned
away he Maid for a corrupt Hussy, if she had known as much ^s the Reader, yet
she was no more Proof against Corruption herself than poor Susan had been.

Mr. Western and his Nephew were not known to one another; nor indeed would the
former have taken any Notice of the latter, if he had known him; for this being
a stolen Match, and consequently an unnatural one in the Opinion of the good
Squire, he had, from the Time of her committing it, abandoned he poor young
Creature, who was then no more than Eighteen, as a Monster, and had never since
suffered her to be named in his Presence.

The Kitchen was now a Scene of universal Confusion, Western enquiring after
his Daughter, and Fitzpatrick as eagerly after his Wife, when Jones entered the
Room, unfortunately having Sophia's Muff in his Hand.

As soon as Western saw Jones, he set up the same Holla as is used by Sportsmen
when their Game is in View. He then immediately run up and laid hold of Jones,
crying, 'We have got the Dog Fox, I warrant the Bitch is not far off.' The
Jargon which followed for some Minutes, where many spoke different Things at
the same Time, as it would be very difficult to discribe, so would it be no
less unpleasant to read.

Jones having, at length, shaken Mr. Western off, and some of the Company
having interfered between them, our Hero protested his Innocence as to knowing
any thing of the Lady; when Parson Supple stepped up, and said, 'It is Folly to
deny it; for why the Marks of Guilt are in thy Hands. I will myself asseverate
and bind it by an Oath, that the Muff thou bear in thy Hand belonged unto
Madam Sophia; for I have frequently observed her, of later Days, to bear it
about her.' 'My Daughter's Muff!' cries the Squire, in a Rage. 'Hath he got my
Daughter's Muff! Bear Witness, the Goo^ are found upon him. I Will have him
before a Justi^^ of Peace this Instant. Where is my Daughter, Vi^lain?' 'Sir,'
said Jones, 'I beg you would ^pacified. The Muff, I acknowledge, is the youn^
Lady's; but, upon my Honor, I have never see her.' At these Words Western lost
all Patienc^ and grew inarticulate with Rage.

Some of the Servants had acquainted Fitzpatric^ who Mr. Western was. The good
Irishman there fore thinking he had now an Opportunity to do a Act of Service
to his Uncle, and by that Means mig^^ possibly obtain his Favor, stepped up to
Jones, an^ cried out, 'Upon my Conscience, Sir, you may ^^ ashamed of denying
your having seen the Gentleman's Daughter before my Face, when you kno^ I found
you there upon the Bed together.' The turning to Western, he offered to conduct
him immediately to the Room where his Daughter was; which Offer being accepted,
he, the Squire, the Parson, and some others, ascended directly to Mrs. Waters
Chamber, which they entered with no less Violence than Mr. Fitzpatrick had done
before.

The poor Lady started from her Sleep with a much Amazement as Terror, and
beheld at her Bed side a Figure which might very well be supposed ^ have
escaped out of Bedlam. Such Wildness an^ Confusion were in the Looks of Mr.
Western; wh^ no sooner saw the Lady, than he started back, showing sufficiently
by his Manner, before he spoke, the this was not the Person sought after.

So much more tenderly do Women value their Reputation than their Persons, that
though the latter seemed now in more Danger than before, yet as the former was
secure, the Lady screamed not with such Violence as she had done on the other
Occasion. However, she no sooner found herself alone, than she abandoned all
Thoughts of further Repose, and as she had sufficient Reason to be dissatisfied
with her present Lodging, she dressed herself with all possible Expedition.

Mr. Western now proceeded to search the whole House, but to as little Purpose
as he had disturbed poor Mrs. Waters. He then returned disconsolate into the
Kitchen, where he found Jones in the Custody of his Servants.

This violent Uproar had raised all the People in the House; though it was yet
scarcely Daylight. Among these was a grave Gentleman, who had the Honor to be
in the Commission of the Peace for the County of Worcester. Of which Mr.
Western was no sooner informed, than he offered to lay his Complaint before
him. The Justice declined executing his Office, as he said he had no Clerk
present, nor no Book about Justice Business. And that he could not carry all
the Law in his Head about stealing away Daughters, and such Sort of Things.

Here Mr. Fitzpatrick offered to lend him his Assistance; informing the Company
that he had been himself bred to the Law. (And indeed he had served three Years
as Clerk to an Attorney in the North of Ireland, when choosing a genteeler Walk
in Life, he quitted his Master, came over to England, and set up that Business,
which requires no Apprenticeship, namely, that of a Gentleman, in which he had
succeeded as has been already partly mentioned.)

Mr. Fitzpatrick declared that the Law concerning Daughters was out of the
present Case; that stealing a Muff was undoubtedly Felony, and the Goods being
found upon the Person, were sufficient Evidence of the Fact.

The Magistrate, upon the Encouragement of so learned a Coadjutor, and upon the
violent Intercession of the Squire, was at length prevailed upon to seat
himself in the Chair of Justice, where being placed, upon viewing the Muff
which Jones still held in his Hand, and upon the Parson's swearing it to be the
Property of Mr. Western, he desired Mr. Fitzpatrick to draw up a Commitment,
which he said h^ would sign.

Jones now desired to be heard, which was at last with Difficulty, granted him.
He then produced the Evidence of Mr. Partridge, as to the finding it; but what
was still more, Susan deposed that Sophia herself had delivered the Muff to
her, and had ordered her to convey it into the Chamber where Mr. Jones had
found it.

Whether a natural Love of Justice, or the extraordinary Comeliness of Jones,
had wrought on Susa^ to make the Discovery, I will not determine; but such were
the Effects of her Evidence that the Magistrate throwing himself back in his
Chair, declare^ that the Matter was now altogether as clear on the Side of the
Prisoner, as it had before been against him; with which the Parson concurred,
saying, The Lord forbid he should be instrumental in committing an innocent
Person to Durance. The Justice then arose, acquitted the Prisoner, and broke up
the Court.

Mr. Western now gave every one present a hearty Curse, and immediately
ordering his Horses, departed in pursuit of his Daughter, without taking the
lea^^ Notice of his Nephew Fitzpatrick, or returning any Answer to his Claim of
Kindred, notwithstanding al^ the Obligations he had just received from that
Gentleman. In the Violence, moreover, of his Hurry and of his Passion, he
luckily forgot to demand the Muff of Jones: I say luckily; for he would have
died on the Spot rather than have parted with it.

Jones likewise, with his Friend Partridge, set for ward the Moment he had paid
his Reckoning, in Que^^ of his lovely Sophia, whom he now resolved never more
to abandon the Pursuit of. Nor could he bring him self even to take Leave of
Mrs. Waters; of whom he detested the very Thoughts, as she had been, though ^ot
designedly, the Occasion of his missing the happiest Interview with Sophia, to
whom he now vowed ^ternal Constancy.

As for Mrs. Waters, she took the Opportunity of he Coach which was going to
Bath; for which Place he set out in Company with the two Irish Gentlemen, he
Landlady kindly lending her her Clothes; in (...) for which she was contented
only to receive a^out double their Value, as a Recompense for the ^oan. Upon
the Road she was perfectly reconciled ^^ Mr. Fitzpatrick, who was a very
handsome Fellow, and indeed did all she could to console him in the Ab^nce of
his Wife.

Thus ended the many odd Adventures which Mr. Jones encountered at his Inn at
Upton, where they (...), to this Day, of the Beauty and lovely Behavior ^f the
charming Sophia, by the Name of the Somer^^shire Angel.

CHAP. VIII. In which the History goes backward.
BEFORE we proceed any farther in our History, it may be proper to look a
little back, in order account for the extraordinary Appearance of Sophia and
her Father at the Inn at Upton.

The Reader may be pleased to remember, that in ^e Ninth Chapter of the Seventh
Book of our His^^ry, we left Sophia, after a long Debate between love and Duty,
deciding the Cause, as it usually, I ^elieve, happens, in Favor of the Former.

This Debate had arisen, as we have there shown, ^^om a Visit which her Father
had just before made ^r, in order to force her Consent to a Marriage with
Blifil; and which he had understood to be fully im^^ied in her Acknowledgment,
that she neither must, ^^ could refuse any absolute Command of his.

Now from this Visit the Squire retired to his Evening Potation, overjoyed at
the Success he had had with his Daughter; and as he was of a social
Disposition, and willing to have Partakers in his Happiness, the Beer was
ordered to flow very liberally into the Kitchen; so that before Eleven in the
Evening, there was not a single Person sober in the House, except only Mrs.
Western herself, and the charming Sophia.

Early in the Morning a Messenger was dispatched to summon Mr. Blifil: For though
the Squire imagined that young Gentleman had been much less acquainted than he
really was, with the former Aversion of hi^ Daughter; as he had not, however,
yet received he^ Consent, he longed impatiently to communicate it to him, not
doubting but that the intended Bride herself would confirm it with her Lips. As
to the Wedding it had the Evening before been fixed, by the Mal^ Parties, to be
celebrated on the next Morning sav^ one.

Breakfast was now set forth in the Parlour, where Mr. Blifil attended, and
where the Squire and his Sister likewise were assembled; and now Sophia was
ordered to be called.

O, Shakespeare, had I thy Pen! O, Hogarth, ha^ I thy Pencil! then would I draw
the Picture of the poor Serving-Man, who with pale Countenance staring Eyes,
chattering Teeth, faultering Tongue and trembling Limbs,

(Even such a Man, so faint, so spiritless,
So dull, so dead in Look, so woe-be-gone,
Drew Priam's Curtains in the dead of Night,
And would have told him, half his Troy wa^ burned)
entered the Room, and declared, -- That Madam Sophia was not be found.

'Not to be found!' cries the Squire, starting from his Chair; 'Zounds and D --
nation! Blood and Fury! Where, when, how, what, -- Not to be found! where?'

'La! Brother,' said Mrs. Western,' with true political Coldness, 'you are
always throwing yourself into such violent Passions for nothing. My Niece, I
suppose, is only walked out into the Garden. I protest you are grown so
unreasonable, that it is impossible to live in the House with you.'

'Nay, nay,' answered the Squire, returning as suddenly to himself, as he had
gone from himself; 'if that be all the Matter, it signifies not much; but, upon
my Soul, my Mind misgave me, when the Fellow said she was not to be found.' He
then gave Orders for the Bell to be rung in the Garden, and sat himself
contentedly down.

No two Things could be more the Reverse of each other than were the Brother
and Sister, in most Instances; particularly in this, That as the Brother never
foresaw any Thing at a Distance, but was most sagacious in immediately seeing
every Thing the Moment it had happened; so the Sister eternally foresaw at a
Distance, but was not so quick-sighted to Objects before her Eyes. Of both
these the Reader may have observed Examples: And, indeed, both their several
Talents were excessive: For as the Sister often foresaw what never came to
pass, so the Brother often saw much more than was actually the Truth.

This was not however the Case at present. The same Report was brought from the
Garden, as before had been brought from the Chamber, that Madam Sophia was not
to be found.

The Squire himself now sallied forth, and begun to ^oar forth the Name of
Sophia as loudly, and in as ^oarse a Voice, as whileom did Hercules that of
Hylas: And as the Poet tells us, that the whole Shore ecchoed back the Name of
that beautiful Youth; so did the House, the Garden, and all the neighboring
Fields, resound nothing but the Name of Sophia, in the hoarse Voice of the Men,
and in the shrill Pipes of the Women; while Echo seemed so pleased to repeat
the beloved Sound, that if there is really such a Person, I believe Ovid has
belied her Sex.

Nothing reigned for a long Time but Confusion; 'till at last the Squire having
sufficiently spent his Breath, returned to the Parlour, where he found Mrs.
Western and Mr. Blifil, and threw himself, with the utmost Dejection in his
Countenance, into a great Chair.

Here Mrs. Western began to apply the following Consolation:

'Brother, I am sorry for what has happened; and that my Niece should have
behaved herself in a Manner so unbecoming her Family; but it is all your own
Doings, and you have no Body to thank but yourself. You know she has been
educated always in a Manner directly contrary to my Advice, and now you see the
Consequence. Have I not a thousand Times argued with you about giving my Niece
her own Will? But you know I never could prevail upon you: And when I had taken
so much Pains to eradicate her headstrong Opinions, and to rectify your Errors
in Policy, you know she was taken out of my Hands; so that I have nothing to
answer for. Had I been trusted entirely with the Care of her Education, no such
Accident as this had ever befallen you: So that you must comfort yourself by
thinking it was all your own Doings; and, indeed, what else could be expected
from such Indulgence?' --

"Zounds! Sister,' answered he,' 'you are enough to make one mad. Have I
indulged her? Have I given her her Will? -- It was no longer ago than last
night Night that I threatened, if she disobeyed me, to confine her to her
Chamber upon Bread and Water, as long as she lived. -- You would provoke the
Patience of Job.'

"Did ever Mortal hear the like?" replied she. 'Brother, if I had not the
Patience of fifty Jobs, you would make me forget all Decency and Decorum. Why
would you interfere? Did I not beg you, did I not entreat you to leave the
whole Conduct to me? You have defeated all the Operations of the Campaign by
one false Step. Would any Man in his Senses have provoked a Daughter by such
Threats as these? How often have I told you, that English Women are not to be
treated like Cira^essian Possibly Cireassian.
Slaves. We have the Protection of the World: We are to be won by gentle Means
only, and not to be hectored, and bullied, and beat into Compliance. I thank
Heaven, no Salique Law governs here. Brother, you have a Roughness in your
Manner which no Woman but myself would bear. I do not wonder my Niece was
frightened and terrified into taking this Measure; and to speak honestly, I
think my Niece will be justified to the World for what she has done. I repeat
it to you again, Brother, you must confort yourself by remembering that it is
all your own Fault. How often have I advised -- 'Here Western rose hastily from
his Chair, and, venting two or three horrid Imprecations, ran out of the Room.

When he was departed, his Sister expressed more Bitterness (if possible)
against him, than she had done while he was present; for the Truth of which she
appealed to Mr. Blifil, who, with great Complaisance, acquiesced entirely in
all she said; but excused all the faults of Mr. Western, 'as they must be
considered,' he said, 'to have proceeded from the too inordinate Fondness of a
Father, which must be allowed the Name of an amiable Weakness.' 'So much the
more inexcusable,' answered the Lady,; 'for whom does he ruin by his Fondness,
but his own Child?' To which Blifil immediately agreed.

Mrs. Western then began to express great Confusion on the Account of Mr.
Blifil, and of the Usage^ which he had received from a Family to which he
intended so much Honor. On this Subject she treated the Folly of her Niece
with great Severity; but concluded with throwing the whole on her Brother, who
she said, was inexcusable to have proceeded so far without better Assurances of
his Daughter's Consent ^ 'But he was (says she) always of a violent, headstrong
Temper; and I can scarce forgive myself for all the Advice I have thrown away
upon him.'

After much of this Kind of Conversation, which, perhaps, would not greatly
entertain the Reader, was it here particularly related, Mr. Blifil took his
Leave and returned home, not highly pleased with his Disappointment; which,
however, the Philosophy which he had acquired from Square, and the Religion
infused into him by Thwackum, together with somewhat else taught him to bear
rather better than more passionate Lovers bear these Kinds of Evils.

CHAP. IX. The Escape of Sophia.
IT is now Time to look after Sophia; whom the Reader, if he loves her half so
well as I do, will rejoice to find escaped from the Clutches of her passionate
Father, and from those of her dispassionate Lover.

Twelve Times did the iron Register of Time bea^^ on the sonorous Bell-metal,
summoning the Ghosts to rise, and walk their nightly Round. -- In plain
Language, it was Twelve of Clock, and all the Family, as we have said, lay
buried in Drink and Sleep except only Mrs. Western, who was deeply engaged in
reading a political Pamphlet, and except our Heroine, who now softly stole down
Stairs, and having unbarred and unlocked one of the House Doors, sallied forth,
and hastened to the Place of Appointment.

Notwithstanding the many pretty Arts, which Ladies sometimes practice, to
display their Fears on every little Occasion, (almost as many as the other Sex
uses to conceal theirs) certainly there is a Degree of Courage, which not only
becomes a Woman, but is often necessary to enable her to discharge her Duty. It
is, indeed, the Idea of Fierceness, and not of Bravery, which destroys the
Female Character: For who can read the Story of the justly celebrated Arria,
without conceiving as high an Opinion of her Gentleness and Tenderness, as of
her Fortitude? At the same Time, perhaps, many a Woman who shrieks at a Mouse,
or a Rat, may be capable of poisoning a Husband; or, what is worse, of driving
him to poison himself.

Sophia, with all the Gentleness which a Woman can have, had all the Spirit
which she ought to have. When, therefore, she came to the Place of Appointment,
and instead of meeting her Maid, as was agreed, saw a Man ride directly up to
her, she neither screamed out, nor fainted away: Not that her Pulse then beat
with its usual Regularity; for she was at first, under some Surprise and
Apprehension: But these were relieved almost as soon as raised, when the Man
pulling off his Hat, asked her, in a very submissive Manner, 'If her Ladyship
did not expect to meet another Lady?' And then proceeded to inform her, that he
was sent to conduct her to that Lady.'

Sophia could have no possible suspicion of any Falsehood in this Account: She
therefore mounted resolutely behind the Fellow, who conveyed her safe to a Town
about Five Miles distant, where she had the Satisfaction of finding the good
Mrs. Honor: For as the Soul of the Waiting Woman was wrapped up in those very
Habiliments which used to enwrap her Body, she could by no Means bring herself
to trust them out of her Sight. Upon these, therefore, she kept Guard in
Person, while she detached the aforesaid Fellow after her Mistress, having
given him all proper Instructions.

They now debated what Course to take, in order to avoid the Pursuit of Mr.
Western, who, they knew, would send after them in a few Hours. The London Road
had such Charms for Honor, that she was desirous of going on directly;
alleging, that as Sophia could not be missed till Eight or Nine the next
Morning, her Pursuers would not be able to overtake her, even though they knew
which Way she had gone. But Sophia had too much at Stake to venture any Thing
to Chance; nor did she dare to trust too much to her tender Limbs, in a Contest
which was to be decided only by Swiftness. She resolved therefore, to travel
across the Country, for at least Twenty or Thirty Miles, and then to take the
direct Road to London. So having hired her Horses to go Twenty Miles one Way,
when she intended to go Twenty Miles the other, she set forward with the same
Guide, behind whom she had ridden from her Father's House; the Guide having now
taken up behind him, in the Room of Sophia, a much heavier, as well as much
less lovely Burden; being, indeed, a huge Portmanteau, well stuffed with those
outside Ornaments, by Means of which the fair Honor hoped to gain many
Conquests, and, finally, to make her Fortune in London City.

When they had gone about Two hundred Paces from the Inn, on the London Road,
Sophia rode up to the Guide, and, with a Voice much fuller of Honey than was
ever that of Anacreon, though his Mouth is supposed to have been a Bee-hive,
begged him to take the first Turning which led toward Bristol.

Reader, I am not superstitious, nor any great Believer in modern Miracles. I
do not therefore, deliver the following as a certain Truth; for, indeed, I can
scarce credit it myself: But the Fidelity of an Historian obliges me to relate
what has been confidently asserted. The Horse, then, on which the Guide rode,
is reported to have been so charmed by Sophia's Voice, that he made a full
Stop, and expressed an Unwillingness to proceed any farther.

Perhaps, however, the Fact may be true, and less miraculous then it has been
represented; since the natural Cause seems adequate to the Effect: For as the
Guide at that Moment desisted from a constant Application of his armed right
Heel, (for, like Hudibras, he wore but one Spur) it is more than possible, that
this Omission alone might occasion the Beast to stop, especially as this was
very frequent with him at other Times.

But if the Voice of Sophia had really an Effect on the Horse; it had very
little on the Rider. He answered somewhat surlily, 'That Measter had ordered
him to go a different Way, and that he should lose his Place, if he went any
other than that he was ordered.'

Sophia finding all her Persuasions had no Effect, began now to add
irresistible Charms to her Voice; Charms, which according to the Proverb, makes
the old Mare trot, instead of standing still; Charms! to which modern Ages have
attributed all that irresistible Force, which the Ancients imputed to perfect
Oratory. In a Word, she promised she would reward him to his utmost Expectation.

The Lad was not totally deaf to these Promises; but he disliked their being
indefinite: For though perhaps he had never heard that Word, yet that in Fact was
his Objection. 'He said, Gentlevolks did not consider the Case of poor Volks;
that he had like to have been turned away the other Day, for riding about the
Country with a Gentleman from Squire Allworthy's, who; did not reward him as he
should have done.'

'With whom? says Sophia eagerly -- With a Gentleman from Squire Allworthy's,
repeated the Lad, 'the Squire's Son, I think, they call 'un.' -- 'Whither?
which Way did he go? says Sophia. Why a little of one Side of Bristol, about
twenty Miles off,' answered the Lad. -- Guide me,' says Sophia 'to the same
Place, and I Will give thee a Guinea, or two, if one is not sufficient.' 'To be
certain, said the Boy, it is honestly worth two, when your Ladyship considers
what a Risk I run; but, however, if your Ladyship will promise me the two
Guineas, I Will even venture: To be certain it is a sinful Thing to ride about my
Master's Horses; but one Comfort is, I can only be turned away, and two Guineas
will partly make me Amends.'

The Bargain being thus struck, the Lad turned aside into the Bristol Road, and
Sophia set forward in Pursuit of Jones, highly contrary to the Remonstrances of
Mrs. Honor, who had much more Desire to see London, than to see Mr. Jones: For
indeed she was not his Friend with her Mistress, as he had been guilty of some
Neglect in certain pecuniary Civilities, which are by Custom due to the
Waiting-gentlewoman in all Love Affairs, and more especially in those of a
clandestine Kind. This we impute rather to the Carelessness of his Temper, than
to any Want of Generosity; but perhaps she derived it from the latter Motive.
Certain it is that she hated him very bitterly on that Account, and resolved to
take every Opportunity of injuring him with her Mistress. It was therefore
highly unlucky for her, that she had gone to the very same Town and Inn whence
Jones had started and still more unlucky was she, in having stumbled on the
same Guide, and on this accidental Discovery which Sophia had made.

Our Travelers arrived at Hambrook This was the Village where Jones met the
Quaker.
at the Break of Day, where Honor was against her Will charged to enquire the
Rout which Mr. Jones had taken. Of this, indeed, the Guide himself could have
informed them; but Sophia, I know not for what Reason, never asked him the
Question.

When Mrs. Honor had made her Report from the Landlord, Sophia, with much
Difficulty, procured some indifferent Horses, which brought her to the Inn,
where Jones had been confined rather by the Misfortune of meeting with a
Surgeon, than by having met with a broken Head.

Here Honor being again charged with a Commission of Enquiry, had no sooner
applied herself to the Landlady, and had described the Person of Mr. Jones,
than that sagacious Woman began, in the vulgar Phrase, to smell a Rat. When
Sophia therefore entered the Room, instead of answering the Maid, the Landlady
addressing herself to the Mistress, began the following Speech.
'Good-lack-a-day! why there now, who would have thought it! I protest the
loveliest Couple that ever Eyes beheld. Ifackins, Madam, it is no Wonder the
Squire run on so about your Ladyship. He told me indeed you was the finest Lady
in the World, and to be sure so you be. Mercy on him, poor Heart, I bepitied
him; so I did, when he used to hug his Pillow, and call it his dear Madam
Sophia. -- I did all I could to dissuade himself from going to the Wars; I told
him there were Men enough that were good for nothing else but to be killed, that
had not the Love of such fine Ladies.' 'Sure,' says Sophia, 'the good Woman is
distracted. 'No, no,' cries the Landlady, 'I am not distracted.' 'What does
your Ladyship think I don't know then? I assure you he told me all.' What saucy
Fellow," cries Honor, 'told you any Thing of my Lady?" No saucy Fellow,'
answered the Landlady, 'but the young Gentleman you enquire after, and a very
pretty young Gentleman he is, and he loves Madam Sophia Western to the Bottom
of his Soul.' 'He love my Lady! I Would have you to know, Woman,' she is Meat for
his Master. -- 'Nay, Honor,' said Sophia, interrupting her, 'don't be angry
with the good Woman, she intends no Harm.' 'No, marry don't I,' answered the
Landlady, emboldened by the soft Accents of Sophia, and then launched into a
long Narrative too tedious to be here set down, in which some Passages dropped,
that gave a little Offense to Sophia, and much more to her Waiting Woman, who
hence took Occasion to abuse poor Jones to her Mistress the Moment they were
alone together, saying, 'that he must be a pitiful Fellow, and could have no
Love for a Lady, whose Name he would thus prostitute in an Alehouse.'

Sophia did not see his Behavior in so very disadvantageous a Light, and was
perhaps more pleased with the violent Raptures of his Love (which the Landlady
exaggrated as much as she had done every other Circumstance) than she was
offended with the rest; and indeed she imputed the whole to the Extravagance,
or rather Ebullience of his Passion, and to the Openness of his Heart.

This Incident, however, being afterward revived in her Mind, and placed in the
most odious Colors by Honor, served to heighten and give Credit to those
unlucky Occurrences at Upton, and assisted the Waiting Woman in her Endeavors
to make her Mistress depart from that Inn without seeing Jones.

The Landlady finding Sophia intended to stay no longer than till her Horses
were ready, and that without either eating or drinking, soon withdrew; when
Honor began to take her Mistress to Task (for indeed she used great Freedom)
and after a long Harangue, in which she reminded her of her Intention to go to
London, and gave frequent Hints of the Impropriety of pursuing a young Fellow,
she at last concluded with this serious Exhortation: 'For Heaven's Sake, Madam,
consider what you are about, and whither you are a going.'

This Advice to a Lady who had already rode near forty Miles, and in no very
agreeable Season, may seem foolish enough. It may be supposed she had well
considered and resolved this already; nay, Mrs. Honor, by the Hints she threw
out, seemed to think so; and this I doubt not is the Opinion of many Readers,
who have, I make no Doubt, been long since well convinced of the Purpose of our
Heroine, and have heartily condemned her for it as a wanton Baggage.

But in reality this was not the Case. Sophia had been lately so distracted
between Hope and Fear, her Duty and Love to her Father her Hatred to Blifil,
her Compassion, and (why should we not confess the Truth) her Love for Jones;
which last the Behavior of her Father, of her Aunt, of every one else, and
more particularly of Jones himself, had blown into a Flame, that her Mind was
in that confused State, which may be truly said to make us ignorant of what we
do, or whither we go, or rather indeed indifferent as to the Consequence of
either.

The prudent and sage Advice of her Maid, produced, however, some cool
Reflection; and she at length determined to go to Gloucester, and thence to
proceed directly to London.

But unluckily, a few Miles before she entered that Town, she met the
Hack-Attorney, who, as is beforementioned, had dined there with Mr. Jones. This
Fellow being well known to Mrs. Honor, stopped and spoke to her; of which Sophia
at that Time took little Notice, more than to enquire who he was.

But having had a more particular Account from Honor of this Man afterward at
Gloucester, and hearing of the great Expedition he usually made in traveling,
for which (as has been before observed) he was particularly famous;
recollecting likewise, that she had overheard Mrs. Honor inform him, that they
were going to Gloucester, she began to fear lest her Father might, by this
Fellow's Means, be able to trace her to that City; wherefore if she should
there strike into the London Road, she apprehended he would certainly b^ able
to overtake her. She therefore altered her Resolution; and having hired Horses
to go a Week Journey, a Way which she did not intend to travel she again set
forward after a light Refreshment, contrary to the Desire and earnest
Entreaties of her Maid and to the no less vehement Remonstrances of Mrs.
Whitefield, who from good Breeding, or perhaps from good Nature (for the poor
young Lady appeared much fatigued) pressed her very heartily to stay that
Evening at Gloucester.

Having refreshed herself only with some Tea, an^ with lying about two Hours on
the Bed, while he^ Horses were getting ready, she resolutely left Mrs.
Whitefield's about eleven at Night, and striking directly into the Worcester
Road, within less than four Hours arrived at that very Inn where we last saw
he^*

Having thus traced our Heroine very particularl^ back from her Departure, till
her Arrival at Upton we shall in a very few Words, bring her Father to the same
Place; who having received the first Scent from the Post-boy, who conducted his
Daughter to Ha^brook, very easily traced her afterward to Gloucester whence he
pursued her to Upton, as he had learn Mr. Jones had taken that Rout (for
Partridge, to ^^ the Squire's Expression, left every where a stro^^ Scent
behind him) and he doubted not in the least b^ Sophia traveled, or, as he
phrased it, ran the sam^ Way. He used indeed a very coarse Expression which
need not be here inserted; as Fox-hunter who alone would understand it, will
easily suggest to themselves.

THE HISTORY OF A FOUNDLING.
BOOK XI. Containing about three Days.
CHAP. I. a Crust for the Critics.
IN our last initial Chapter, we may be supposed to have treated that
formidable Set of Men, who are called Critics, with more Freedom than becomes
us; since they exact, and indeed generally receive, great Condescension from
Authors. We shall in this, therefore, give the Reasons of our Conduct to this
august Body; and here we shall perhaps place them in a Light, in which they
have not hitherto been seen.

This Word Critic is of Greek Derivation, and signifies Judgment. Hence I
presume some Persons who have not understood the Original, and have seen the
English Translation of the Primative, have concluded that it meant Judgment in
the legal Sense, in which it is frequently used as equivalent to Condemnation.

I am the rather inclined to be of that Opinion as the greatest Number of
Critics has of late Year been found amongst the Lawyers. Many of these
Gentlemen, from Despair, perhaps, of ever rising to the Bench in
Westminster Hall, have placed them selves on the Benches at the Playhouses,
where they have exerted their judicial Capacity, and have given Judgment, i. e.
condemned without Mercy.

The Gentlemen would perhaps be well enough pleased, if we were to leave them
thus compared to one of the most important and honorable Offices in the
Commonwealth, and if we intended to apply to their Favor we would do so; but
as we design to deal very sincerely and plainly too with them, we must remind
them of another Officer of Justice of a much lower Rank; to whom, as they not
only pronounce but execute their own Judgment, they bear likewise some remote
Resemblance.

But in reality there is another Light in which these modern Critics may with
great Justice and Propriety be seen; and this is that of a common Slanderer. If
a Person who prys into the Characters of others, with no other Design but to
discover their Faults, and to publish them to the World, deserves the Title of
a Slanderer of the Reputations of Men; why should not a Critic, who reads with
the same male-volent View, be as properly styled the Slanderer of the
Reputation of Books?

Vice has not, I believe, a more abject Slave; Society produces not a more
odious Vermin; nor can the Devil receive a Guest more worthy of him, no^
possibly more welcome to him, than a Slanderer. The World, I am afraid, regards
not this Monster with half the Abhorrence which he deserves, and I am more
afraid to assign the Reason of this criminal Lenity shown toward him; yet it
is certain that the Thief looks innocent in the Comparison; nay, the Murderer
himself can seldom stand in Competition with his Guilt: For Slander is a more
cruel Weapon than a Sword, as the Wounds which the former gives are always
incurable. One Method, indeed, there is of killing, and that the basest and
most execrable of all, which bears an exact Analogy to the Vice here disclaimed
against, and that is Poison. A Means of Revenge so base, and yet so horrible,
that it was once wisely distinguished by our Laws from all other Murders, in
the peculiar Severity of the Punishment.

Besides the dreadful Mischiefs done by Slander, and the Baseness of the Means
by which they are effected, there are other Circumstances that highly ag^ravate
its atrocious Quality: For it often proceeds from no Provocation, and seldom
promises itself any Reward, unless some black and infernal Mind may ^ropose a
Reward in the Thoughts of having pro^ured the Ruin and Misery of another.

Shakespeare has nobly touched this Vice, when he ^ays,

Who steals my Gold steals Trash, it is something, nothing;
'Twas mine, it is his, and has been Slave to Thousands:
But he who filches from me my good Name,
Robs me of that WHICH NOT ENRICHES HIM,
BUT MAKES ME POOR INDEED.
With all this my good Reader will doubtless agree; ^t much of it will probably
seem too severe, when ^pplied to the Slander of Books. But let it here be
^onsidered, that both proceed from the same wicked Disposition of Mind, and are
alike void of the Ex^use of Temptation. Nor shall we conclude the In^y done
this Way to be very slight, when we con^^der a Book as the Author's Offspring,
and indeed ^^ the Child of his Brain.

The Reader who has suffered his Muse to continue hitherto in a Virgin State,
can have but a ver^ inadequate Idea of this Kind of paternal Fondness To such
we may parody the tender Exclamation o^ Macduff. Alas! Thou have written no
Book. Bu^ the Author whose Muse has brought forth, will fe^ the pathetic
Strain, perhaps will accompany me wi^^ Tears (especially if his Darling be
already no more while I mention the Uneasiness with which the b^ Muse bears
about her Burden, the painful Labor with which she produces it, and lastly,
the Care, the Fondness, with which the tender Father nourishes h^ Favorite,
till it be brought to Maturity, and produce^ into the World.

Nor is there any paternal Fondness which seems le^ to savor of absolute
Instinct, which may so well b^ reconciled to worldly Wisdom as this. These
Children may most truly be called the Riches of their Father; and many of them
have with true filial Piety fe^ their Parent in his old Age; so that not only
the Affection, but the Interest of the Author may b^ highly injured by these
Slanderers, whose poisono^ Breath brings his Book to an untimely End.

Lastly, The Slander of a Book is, in Truth, the Slander of the Author: For as
no one can call and there Bastard, without calling the Mother a Whore, neither
can any one give the Names of sad Stuff horrid Nonsense, etc. to a Book,
without calling the Author a Blockhead; which though in a moral Sen^ it is a
preferable Appellation to that of Villain, perhaps rather more injurious to his
worldly Intere^^*

Now however ludicrous all this may appear some, others, I doubt not, will feel
and acknowledg^ the Truth of it; nay, may, perhaps, think I have not treated
the Subject with decent Solemnity; b^^ surely a Man may speak Truth with a
smiling Courtenance. In reality, to depreciate a Book maliciou^ly, or even
wontonly, is at least a very ill nature Office; and a morose snarling Critic,
may, I believe, ^e suspected to be a bad Man.

I will therefore endeavor in the remaining Part of this Chapter, to explain
the Marks of this Character, and to show what Criticism I here intend to
^obviate: For I can never be understood, unless by the very Persons here meant,
to insinuate, that there are no proper Judges of Writing, or to endeavor to
exclude from the Commonwealth of Literature any of those noble Critics, to
whose Labors the learned World are so greatly indebted. Such were Aristotle,
Horace, and Longinus among the Ancients, Dacier and Bossu among the French, and
some perhaps among us; who have certainly been duly authorized to execute at
least a judicial Authority in Foro Literario.

But without ascertaining all the proper Qualifications of a Critic, which I
have touched on elsewhere, I think I may very boldly object to the Censures of
any one past upon Works which he has not himself read. Such Censurers as
these, whether they speak from their own Guess or Suspicion, or from the Report
and Opinion of others, may properly be said to slander the Reputation of the
Book they condemn.

Such may likewise be suspected of deserving this Character, who without
assigning any particular Faults, condemn the whole in general deformatory
Terms; such as vile, dull, da -- d Stuff, etc. and particularly by the Use of
the Monosyllable LOW; a Word which becomes the Mouth of no Critic who is not
RIGHT HONORABLE.

Again, though there may be some Faults justly assigned in the Work, yet if those
are not in the most essential Parts, or if they are compensated by greater
Beauties, it will savor rather of the Malice of a Slanlerer, than of the
Judgment of a true Critic, to pass ^ severe Sentence upon the whole, merely on
account of some vicious Part. This is directly contrary to he Sentiments of
Horace.

Verum ubi plura nitent in carmine non ego paucis
Offender maculis, quas aut incuria fudit,
Aut humana parum cavit natura --
But where the Beauties, more in Number, shine,
I am not angry, when a casual Line
(That with some trivial Faults unequal flows)
A careless Hand, or human Frailty shows.
Mr. FRANCIS

For as Martial says, Aliter, non fit, Avite, Liber* No Book can be otherwise
composed. All Beauty o^ Character, as well as of Countenance, and indeed o^
every Thing human, is to be tried in this Manner. Cruel indeed would it be if
such a Work as this History, which has employed some Thousands of Hours in the
composing, should be liable to be condemned because some particular Chapter, or
perhaps Chapters may be obnoxious to very just and sensible Objections. And yet
nothing is more common than the most rigorous Sentence upon Books supported by
some Objections, which if they were rightly taken (and that they are not
always) do by no Means go to the Merit of the whole. In the Theater especially,
a single Expression which does not coincide with the Taste of the Audience, or
with any individual Critic of that Audience, is sure to be hissed; and one
Scene which should be disapproved, would hazard the whole Piece. To write
within such severe Rules as these, is as impossible, as to live up to some
splenetic Opinions; and if we judge according to the Sentiments of some
Critics, and of some Christians, no Author will be saved in this World, and no
Man in the next.

CHAP. II. The Adventures which Sophia met with, after her leaving Upton.
OUR History, just before it was obliged to turn about, and travel backwards,
had mentioned the Departure of Sophia and her Maid from the Inn; we shall now
therefore, pursue the Steps of that lovely ^reature, and leave her unworthy
Lover a little longer to bemoan his Ill-Luck, or rather his Ill Con^uct.

Sophia having directed her Guide to travel through ^ye-Roads cross the
Country, they now passed the ^vern, and had scarce got a Mile from the Inn,
when ^e young Lady looking behind her, saw several Horses coming after on full
Speed. This greatly ^armed her Fears, and she called to the Guide to ^ut on as
fast as possible.

He immediately obeyed her, and away they rode full Gallop. But the faster they
went, the faster ^ere they followed; and as the Horses behind were ^omewhat
swifter than those before, so the former ^ere at length overtaken. A happy
Circumstance ^r poor Sophia; whose Fears, joined to her Fatigue, ^ad almost
overpowered her Spirits; but she was now ^^stantly relieved by a female Voice,
that greeted ^er in the softest Manner, and with the utmost Civi^^^y. This
Greeting, Sophia, as soon as she could ^ecover her Breath, with like Civility,
and with the ^ighest Satisfaction to herself, returned.

The Travelers who joined Sophia, and who had ^iven her such Terror,
consisted, like her own Company, of two Females and a Guide. The two Par^es
proceeded three full Miles together before any ^ne offered again to open their
Mouths; when our ^^eroine having pretty well got the better of her Fear; ^ut
yet being somewhat surprised that the other still ^ontinued to attend her, as
she pursued no great Road, ^^d had already passed through several Turnings,
^^costed the strange Lady in a most obliging Tone; ^^d said, 'She was very
happy to find they were both traveling the same Way.' The other, who ^e a
Ghost, only wanted to be spoke to, readily ^^swered, 'That the Happiness was
entirely hers; that she was a perfect Stranger in that Country and was so
overjoyed at meeting a Companion o^ her own Sex, that she had perhaps been
guilty o^ an Impertinence which required great Apology, i^ keeping Pace with
her.' More Civilities passe^ between these two Ladies; for Mrs. Honor had no^
given Place to the fine Habit of the Stranger, an^ had fallen into the Rear.
But though Sophia had great Curiosity to know why the other Lady continued ^^
travel on through the same Bye-Roads with herself nay, though this gave her some
Uneasiness; yet Fea^ or Modesty, or some other Consideration, restraind her
from asking the Question.

The strange Lady now labored under a Difficult which appears almost below the
Dignity of History ^ mention. Her Bonnet had been blown from h^^ Head not less
than five Times within the lastt Mile^ nor could she come at any Ribbon or
Handkerchi^^ to tie it under her Chin. When Sophia was informed of this, she
immediately supplied her with a Handkerchief for this Purpose; which while she
was pu^ling from her Pocket, she perhaps too much neglected the Management of
her Horse, for the Beast no^ unluckily making a false Step, fell upon his Four
Legs, and threw his Fair Rider from his Back.

Though Sophia came Head foremost to the Groun^ she happily received not the
least Damage; and t^ same Circumstances which had perhaps contributed her Fall,
now preserved her from Confusion; ^^ the Lane which they were then passing was
narr^^ and very much overgrown with Trees, so that t^ Moon could here afford
very little Light, and w^ moreover, at present, so obscured in a Cloud, tha^
was almost perfectly dark. By these Men's t^ young Lady's Modesty, which was
extremely delica^^ escaped as free from Injury as her Limbs, and she w^^ once
more reinstated in her Saddle, having receiv^ no other Harm than a little
Fright by her Fall.

Daylight at length appeared in its full Luster; and ^ow the two Ladies, who
were riding over a Common Side by Side, looking steadfastly at each other, at
^he same Moment both their Eyes became fixed; both their Horses stopped, and both
speaking together, with ^qual Joy pronounced, the one the Name of Sophia, ^e
other that of Harriet.

This unexpected Encounter surprised the Ladies ^uch more than I believe it
will the sagacious Reader, who must have imagined that the strange Lady could
^^ no other than Mrs. Fitzpatrick, the Cousin of Miss Western, whom we
beforementioned to have sallied ^om the Inn a few Minutes after her.

So great was the Surprise and Joy which these two ^ousins conceived at this
Meeting (for they had for^erly been most intimate Acquaintance and Friends, ^d
had long lived together with their Aunt Western) at it is impossible to recount
half the Congratulations which passed between them, before either asked a ve^^
natural Question of the other, namely, whither she as going.

This at last, however, came first from Mrs. Fitzpatrick; but easy and natural
as the Question may ^^m, Sophia, found it difficult to give it a very ready
^^tain Answer. She begged her Cousin therefore suspend all Curiosity till they
arrived at some Inn, which I suppose,' says she, 'can hardly be far ^^istant;
and believe me, Harriet, I suspend as much Curiosity on my Side; for indeed I
believe our Astonishment is pretty equal.

The Conversation which passed between these La^^s on the Road, was, I
apprehend, little worth re^^ng; and less certainly was that between the two
^aiting-women: For they likewise began to pay ^^ir Compliments to each other.
As for the Guides, ^^y were debarred from the Pleasure of Discourse, one being
placed in the Van, and the other oblig^^ to bring up the Rear.

In this Posture they traveled many Hours, till they came into a wide and
well-beaten Road, which as they turned to the Right, soon brought them to a
very fair promising Inn; where they all alighted: But so fatigued was Sophia,
that as she had sat her Horse during the last five or six Miles with great
Difficulty so was she now incapable of dismounting from him without Assistance.
This the Landlord, who had hold of her Horse, presently perceiving, offered to
lift her in his Arms from her Saddle; and she too readily accepted the Tender
of his Service. Indeed Fortune seems to have resolved to put Sophia to the
Blush that Day. and the second malicious Attempt succeeded better than the
first; for my Landlord had no sooner received the young Lady in hi^ Arms, than
his Feet, which the Gout had lately very severely handled, gave way, and down
he tumbled; but at the same Time, with no less Dexterity than Gallantry,
contrived to throw himself under hi^ charming Burden, so that he alone
received any Bruise from the Fall; for the greatest Injury which happened to
Sophia, was a violent Shock given to he^ Modesty, by an immoderate Grin which,
at her rising from the Ground, she observed in the Countenance of most of the
Bye-Standers. This made her suspect what had really happened, and what we shall
not here relate, for the Indulgence of those Reader who are capable of laughing
at the Offense given to a young Lady's Delicacy. Accidents of this Kind w^ have
never regarded in a comical Light; nor will we scruple to say, that he must
have a very inadequate Idea of the Modesty of a beautiful young Woman, who
would wish to sacrifice it to so paultry Satisfaction as can arise from
Laughter.

This Fright and Shock, joined to the violent Fatigue which both her Mind and
Body had undergone, almost overcame the excellent Constitution of Sophia, an^
she had scarce Strength sufficient to totter into the ^^n, leaning on the Arm
of her Maid. Here she was no sooner seated than she called for a Glass of
Water; but Mrs. Honor, very judiciously, in my Opinion, changed it into a
Glass of Wine.

Mrs. Fitzpatrick hearing from Mrs. Honor, that Sophia had not been in Bed
during the two-last Nights, and observing her to look very pale and wan with
her Fatigue, earnestly entreated her to refresh herself with some Sleep. She
was yet a Stranger to her History, or her Apprehensions; but had she known
both, she would have given the same Advice; for Rest was vi^^bly necessary for
her; and their long Journey through ^ye-Roads so entirely removed all Danger of
Pursuit, that she was herself perfectly easy on that Account.

Sophia was easily prevailed on to follow the Counsel of her Friend, which was
heartily seconded by ^er Maid. Mrs. Fitzpatrick likewise offered to bear ^er
Cousin Company, which Sophia, with much Complaisance, accepted.

The Mistress was no sooner in Bed, than the Maid ^repared to follow her
Example. She began to make many Apologies to her Sister Abigail for leaving her
^lone in so horrid a Place as an Inn; but the other ^^opt her short, being as
well inclined to a Nap as herself, and desired the Honor of being her
Bed^ellow. Sophia's Maid agreed to give her a Share of ^er Bed, but put in her
Claim to all the Honor. So after many Curt'sies and Compliments, to Bed
toge^^er went the Waiting-women, as their Mistresses ^^d done before them.

It was usual with my Landlord (as indeed it is with ^e whole Fraternity) to
enquire particularly of all ^oachmen, Footmen, Postboys, and others, into the
^ames of all his Guests: what their Estate was, and ^here it lay. It cannot
therefore be wondered at, ^at the many particular Circumstances which attend^
our Travelers, and especially their retiring all to Sleep at so extraordinary
and unusual an Hour as ten in the Morning, should excite his Curiosity. As soon
therefore as the Guides entered the Kitchen, he began to examine who the Ladies
were, and whence they came; but the Guides, though they faithfully related all
they knew, gave him very little Satisfaction. On the contrary, they rather
enflamed his Curiosity than extinguished it.

This Landlord had the Character, among all his Neighbors, of being a very
sagacious Fellow. He was thought to see farther and deeper into Things than any
Man in the Parish, the Parson himself not excepted. Perhaps his Look had
contributed not a little to procure him this Reputation; for there was in this
something wonderfully wise and significant, especially when he had his Pipe in
his Mouth; which, indeed, he seldom was without. His Behavior likewise,
greatly assisted in promoting the Opinion of his Wisdom. In his Deportment he
was solemn, if not sullen; and when he spoke, which was seldom, he always
delivered himself in a slow Voice; and though his Sentences were short, they
were still interrupted with many Hum's and Has, Ay, Ays, and other Expletives:
So that though he accompanied his Words with certain explanatory Gestures, such
as shaking, or nodding the Head, or pointing with his Forefinger he generally
left his Hearers to understand more than he expressed; nay, he commonly gave
them a Hint that he knew much more than he thought proper to disclose. This
last Circumstance alone, may, indeed very well account for his Character of
Wisdom, since Men are strangely inclined to worship what they do not
understand. A grand Secret, upon which severa^ Imposers on Mankind have totally
relied for the Success of their Frauds.

This politic Person now taking his Wife aside asked her, 'What she thought of
the Ladies lately 'arrived?' 'Think of them!' said the Wife, 'why what should I
think of them?' 'I know,' answered he, 'what I think. The Guides tell strange
Stories. One pretends to be come from Gloucester, and the other from Upton; and
neither of them, for what I can find, can tell whither they are going. But what
People ever travel across the Country from Upton hither, especially to London?
And one of the Maidservants, before she alighted from her Horse, asked, if
this was not the London Road? Now I have put all these Circumstances together,
and whom do you think I have found them out to be?' 'Nay, answered she, you
know I never pretend to guess at your Discoveries.'. -- 'It is a good Girl,'
replied he, chucking her under her Chin; 'I must own you have always submitted
to my Knowledge of these Matters. Why then, depend upon it; mind what I say, --
depend upon it, they are certainly some of the Rebel Ladies, who, they say,
travel with the young Chevalier; and have taken a round about Way to escape the
Duke's Army. 'Husband, quoth the Wife, 'you have certainly hit it; for one of
them is dressed as fine as any Princess; and, to be sure, she looks for all the
World like one. -- But yet, when I consider one Thing. When you consider,'
cries the Landlord contemp^ously -- 'Come, pray let us hear what you consider.'
-- Why, it is,' answered the Wife, that she is too humble to be any very great
Lady; for while our Betty was warming the Bed, she called her nothing but
Child, and my Dear, and Sweetheart; and when Betty offered to pull off her
Shoes and Stockings, she would not suffer her, saying, she would not give her
the trouble.'

'Pugh! answered the Husband, This is nothing. Do think, because you have
seen some great Ladies rude and uncivil to Persons below them, that none of
them know how to behave themselves when they come before their inferiors? I
think I know People of Fashion when I see them. I think I do. Did she not call
for a Glass of Water when she came in? Another Sort of Woman would have called
for a Dram; you know they would. If she be not a Woman of very great Quality,
sell me for a Fool; and, I believe, those who buy me will have a bad Bargain.
Now, would a Woman of her Quality travel without a Footman, unless upon some
such extraordinary Occasion? Nay, to be sure, Husband, cries she, you know
these Matters better than I, or most Folk.' I think I do know something, said
he. To be sure, answered the the Wife, 'the poor little Heart looked so
piteous, when she sat down in the Chair, I protest I could not help having a
Compassion for her almost as much as if she had been a poor Body. But what is to
be done, Husband? If an she be a Rebel, I suppose you intend to betray her up
to the Court. Well, she is a sweet-tempered, good-humoured Lady, be she what she
will, and I shall hardly refrain from crying when I hear she is hanged or
beheaded. Pooh, answered the Husband? -- But as to what is to be done is not so
easy a Matter to determine. I hope, before she goe^ away, we shall have the
News of a Battle: for i^ the Chevalier should get the better, she my gain u^
Interest at Court, and make our Fortunes without betraying her. Why that is
true, replied the Wife; and I heartily hope she will have it in her Power.
Certainly she is a sweet good Lady; i^ would go horribly against me to have her
come to any Harm. Pooh, cries the Landlord, Women are always so tenderhearted.
Why you would not harbor Rebels, would you? No, certainly, answered the Wife;
and as for betraying her, come what will on it, Nobody can blame us. It is what
any body would do in our Case.'

While our politic Landlord, who had not, we see undeservedly the Reputation of
great Wisdom among his Neighbors, was engaged in debating this Matter with
himself, (for he paid little Attention to the Opinion of his Wife) News arrived
that the Rebels had given the Duke the Slip, and had got a Day's March toward
London; and soon after arrived a famous Ja^^ite Squire, who, with great Joy in
his Countenance, shook the Landlord by the Hand, saying, All Is our own, Boy,
ten thousand honest Frenchmen are landed in Suffolk. Old England for ever! Ten
thousand French, my brave Lad! I am going to tap away directly.'

This News determined the Opinion of the wise Man, and he resolved to make his
Court to the young Lady, when she arose; for he had now (he said) discovered
that she was no other than Madam Jenny Cameron herself.

CHAP. III. A very short Chapter, in which however is a Sun, a Moon, a Star,
and an Angel.
THE Sun (for he keeps very good Hours at this Time of the Year) had been some
Time retired to rest, when Sophia arose greatly refreshed by her Sleep; which,
short as it was, nothing but her extreme Fatigue could have occasioned; for
though she had told her Maid, and perhaps herself too, that she was perfectly
easy, when she left Upton, yet it is certain her Mind was a little affected
with that Malady which is attended with all the restless Symptoms of a Fever,
and is perhaps the very distemper which Physicians mean (if they mean any
thing) by the Fever on the Spirits.

Mrs. Fitzpatrick likewise left her Bed at the same Time, and having summoned
her Maid, immediately dressed herself. She was really a very pretty Woman, and
had she been in any other Company but that of Sophia, might have been thought
beautiful; but when Mrs. Honor of her own accord attended (for her Mistress
would not suffer her to be awaked) and had equipped our Heroine, the Charms of
Mrs. Fitzpatrick who had performed the Office of the Morning Star, and had
preceded greater Glories, shared the Fate of that Star, and were totally
eclipsed the Moment those Glories shone forth.

Perhaps Sophia never looked more beautiful than she did at this Instant. We
ought not therefore to condemn the Maid of the Inn for her Hyperb^le who when
she descended, after having lighted the Fire declared, and ratified it with an
Oath, that if ever there was an Angel upon Earth, she was now above Stairs.

Sophia had acquainted her Cousin with her Design to go to London; and Mrs.
Fitzpatrick had agreed to accompany her; for the arrival of her Husband a^
Upton had put an End to her Design of going to Bath or to her Aunt Western.
They had therefore no sooner finished their Tea, than Sophia proposed to se^
out, the Moon then shining extremely bright, and as for the Frost she defied
it; nor had she any of those Apprehensions which many young Ladies would have
felt at traveling by Night; for she had, as we have before observed, some
little Degree of natural Courage; and this her present Sensations, which
bordered somewhat on Despair, greatly increased. Besides, as she had already
traveled twice with Safety by the Light of the Moon, she was the better
emboldened to trust to it a third Time.

The Disposition of Mrs. Fitzpatrick was more t^morous: for though the greater
Terrors had conquere^ the less, and the Presence of her Husband had drive^ her
away at so unseasonable an Hour from Upton, ye^ being now arrived at a Place
where she thought herself safe from his Pursuit, these lesser Terrors of know
not what, operated so strongly, that she earnestly entreated her Cousin to stay
till the next Morning, an^ not expose herself to the Dangers of traveling by
Night.

Sophia, who was yielding to an Excess, when she could neither laugh nor reason
her Cousin out of these Apprehensions, at last gave Way to them. Perhaps
indeed, had she known of her Father's Arrival at Upton, it might have been more
difficult to have persuaded her; for as to Jones, she had, I am afraid no great
Horror at the Thoughts of being overtaken by him; nay, to confess the Truth, I
believe she rather wished than feared it; though I might honestly enough have
concealed this Wish from the Reader, as it was one of those secret spontaneous
Emotions of the Soul, to which the Reason is often a Stranger.

When our young Ladies had determined to remain all that Evening in their Inn,
they were attended by the Landlady, who desired to know what their Ladyships
would be pleased to eat. Such Charms were there in the Voice, in the Manner,
and in the affable Deportment of Sophia, that she ravished the Landlady to the
highest Degree; and that good Woman, concluding that she had attended Jenny
Cameron, became in a Moment a staunch Jacobite, and wished heartily well to the
young Pretender's Cause, from the great sweetness and Affability with which she
had been treated by his supposed Mistress.

The two Cousins began now to impart to each other their reciprocal Curiosity,
to know what extraordinary Accidents on both sides occasioned this so strange
and unexpected meeting. At last Mrs. Fitzpatrick, having obtained of Sophia a
Promise of communicating likewise in her Turn, began to relate what the Reader,
if he is desirous to know her History, may read in the ensuing Chapter.

CHAP. IV. The History of Mrs. Fitzpatrick.
MRS. Fitzpatrick, after a Silence of a few Moments, fetching a deep Sigh, thus
began:

'It is natural to the Unhappy to feel a secret Concern in recollecting those
Periods of their Lives which have been most delightful to them. The Remembrance
of past Pleasures affects us with a kind of tender Grief, like what we suffer
for departed Friends; and the Ideas of both may be said to haunt our
Imaginations.'

'For this Reason, I never reflect without Sorrow on those Days (the happiest
far of my Life) which we spent together, when both were under the Care of my
Aunt Western. Alas? why are Miss Graveairs, and Miss Giddy no more. You
remember, I am sure, when we knew each other by no other Names. Indeed you gave
me the latter Appellation with too just Cause. I have since experienced how
much I deserved it. You, my Sophia, was always my Superior in every thing, and
I heartily hope you will be so in your Fortune. I shall never forget the wise
and matronly Advice you once gave me when I lamented being disappointed of a
Ball, though you could not be then fourteen Years old. -- O my Sophy, how blessed
must have been my Situation, when I could think such a Disappointment a
Misfortune and when indeed it was the greatest I had ever known.'

'And yet, my dear Harriet,' answered Sophia it was then a serious Matter with
you. Comfort yourself therefore with thinking, that whatever you now lament may
hereafter appear as triffling and contemptible as a Ball would at this Time.'

'Alas, my Sophia,' replied the other Lady, 'you yourself will think otherwise
of my present Situation; for greatly must that tender Heart be altered if my
Misfortunes do not draw many a Sigh, nay many a Tear, from you. The Knowledge
of this should perhaps deter me from relating what I am convinced will so much
affect you.' -- Here Mrs. Fitzpatrick stopped, till at the repeated Entreaties o^
Sophia, she proceeded.

'Though you must have heard much of my Marriage, yet as Matters may probably
have been mis represented, I will set out from the very Commencement of my
unfortunate Acquaintance with my Husband; which was at Bath, soon after you'
left my Aunt, and returned home to your Father.

'Among the gay young Fellows, who were at this Season at Bath, Mr. Fitzpatrick
was one. He was handsome, degage, extremely gallant, and in his Dress exceeded
most others. In short, my Dear, if you was unluckily to see him now, I could
describe him no better than by telling you he was the very Reverse of every
Thing which he is: For he has rusticated himself so long, that he is become an
absolute wild Irishman. But to proceed in my Story; the Qualifications which he
then possessed so well recommended him, that though the People of Quality at
this Time lived separate from the rest of the Company, and excluded them from
all their Parties, Mr. Fitzpatrick found Means to gain Admittance. It was
perhaps no easy Matter to avoid him; for he required very little or no
Invitation; and as being handsome and genteel, he found it no difficult Matter
to ingratiate himself with the Ladies, so, he having frequently drawn his
Sword, the Men did not care publicly to affront him. Had it not been for some
such Reason, I believe he would have been soon expelled by his own Sex; for
surely he had no strict Title to be preferred to the English Gentry; nor did
they seem inclined to show him any extraordinary Favor. They all abused him
behind his Back, which might probably proceed from Envy; for he was well
received,' and very particularly distinguished by the Women.

'My Aunt, though no Person of Quality herself, as she had always lived about the
Court, was enrolled in that Party: For by whatever Means you get into the
Polite Circle, when you are once there, it is sufficient Merit for you that you
are there. This Observation, young as you was, you could scarce avoid making
from my Aunt, who was free, or reserved, with all People, just as they had more
o^' less of this Merit.

'And this Merit, I believe, it was, which principally recommended Mr.
Fitzpatrick to her Favor. In which he so well succeeded, that he was always
one of her private Parties. Nor was h^ backward in returning such Distinction;
for he soon grew so very particular in his Behavior to her, tha^ the Scandal
Club first began to take Notice of it and the better disposed Persons made a
Match between them. For my own Part, I confess, I made no Doubt but that his
Designs were strictly honorable, as the Phrase is; that is, to rob a Lady of
he Fortune by Way of Marriage. My Aunt was, conceived, neither young enough nor
handsome enough, to attract much wicked Inclination; but' she had matrimonial
Charms in great Abundance.

'I was the more confirmed in this Opinion from the extraordinary Respect which
he showed to my self from the first Moment of our Acquaintance. This I
understood as an attempt to lessen, if possible that Disinclination which my
Interest might be supposed to give me toward the Match; and I know no but in
some Measure it had that Effect: for as I was well contented with my own
Fortune, and of all People the least a Slave to interested Views, so could not
be violently the Enemy of a Man with whose Behavior to me I was greatly
pleased; and the more so, as I was the only Object of such Respect; for he
behaved at the same Time to many' Women of Quality without any Respect at all.

'Agreeable as this was to me, he soon changed i^ into another Kind of
Behavior, which was perhaps more so. He now put on much Softness and
Tenderness, and languished and sighed abundantly. At Times indeed, whether from
Art or Nature will not determine, he gave his usual loose to Gaye ty and Mirth;
but this was always in general Company, and with other Women; for even in a
Country Dance, when he was not my Partner, he became grave and put on the
softest Look imaginable, the Moment he approached me. Indeed he was in all
Things so very particular toward me, that I must have been blind not to have
discovered it. And, and, and -- 'And you was more pleased still, my dear
Harriet,' cries Sophia; 'you need not be ashamed, added she sighing, 'for sure
there are irresistible Charms in Tenderness, which too many Men are able to
affect.' 'True,' answered her Cousin, 'Men who in all other Instances want
common 'Sense, are very Machiavels in the Art of Loving. I wish I did not know
an Instance. -- Well, Scandal now began to be as busy with me as it had before
been with my Aunt, and some good Ladies did not scruple to affirm that Mr.
Fitzpatrick had an Intrigue with us both.'

'But what may seem astonishing; my Aunt never saw, nor in the least seemed to
suspect that which was visible enough, I believe, from both our Behaviors. One
would indeed think, that Love quite puts out the Eyes of an old Woman. In Fact,
they so greedily swallow the Addresses which are made to them, that like an
outrageous Glutton, they are not at Leisure to observe what passes amongst
others at the same Table. This I have observed in more Cases than my own; and
this was so strongly verified by my Aunt, that though she often found us together
at her Return from the Pump, the least: canting Word of his, pretending
Impatience at her Absence effectually smothered all Suspicion. One Artifice
succeeded with her to Admiration. This was his treating me like a little Child,
and never calling me by any other Name in her Presence, but that of pretty
Miss. This indeed did him some Disservice with your humble Servant; but I soon
saw through it, especially as in her Absence he behaved to me, as I have said,
in a different Manner. However, if I was not greatly disobliged by a Conduct of
which I had discovered the Design, I smarted very severely for it: For my Aunt
really conceived me to be what her Lover (as she thought him) called me, and
treated me, in all Respects, as a perfect Infant. To say the Truth, I wonder
she had not insisted on my again wearing Leading-strings.'

'At last, my Lover (for so he was) thought proper, in a most solemn Manner, to
disclose a Secret which I had known long before. He now placed all the Love
which he had pretended to my Aunt to my Account. He lamented the Encouragement
she had given him in very pathetic Terms, and made a high Merit of the tedious
Hours, in which he had undergone her Conversation. -- What shall I tell you, my
dear Sophia? -- Then I will confess the Truth. I was pleased with my Man. I was
pleased with my Conquest. To rival my Aunt delighted me; to rival so many other
Women charmed me. In short, I am afraid, I did not behave as I should do, even
upon the very first Declaration. -- I wish I did not almost give him positive
Encouragement before we parted.'

'The Bath now talked loudly, I might almost say, roared against me. Several
young Women affected to shun my Acquaintance, not so much, perhaps, from any
real Suspicion, as from a Desire of banishing me from a Company, in which I too
much engrossed their favorite Man. And here I cannot omit expressing my
Gratitude to the Kindness intended me by Mr. Nash; who took me one Day aside,
and gave me Advice, which if I had followed, I had been a happy Woman.'
"Child," says he, 'I am sorry to see the Familiarity which subsists between you
and a Fellow who is altogether unworthy of you, and I am afraid will prove your
Ruin. As for your old stinking Aunt, if it was to be no Injury to you, and my
pretty Sophia Western (I assure you I repeat his Words) I should be heartily
glad, that the Fellow was in Possession of all that belongs to her. I never
advise old Women: For if they take it into their Heads to go to the Devil, it
is no more possible, than worth while to keep them from him. Innocence and
Youth and Beauty are worthy a better Fate, and I would save them from his
Clutches. Let me advise you therefore, dear Child; never suffer this Fellow to
be particular with you again." ' -- Many more Things he said to me, which I
have now forgotton, and indeed I attended very little to them at that Time: For
Inclination contradicted all he said, and besides I could not be persuaded,
that Women of Quality would condescend to Familiarity with such a Person as he
described.'

'But I am afraid, my Dear, I shall tire you with a Detail of so many minute
Circumstances. To be concise therefore, imagine me married; imagine me with my
Husband, at the Feet of my Aunt, and then imagine the maddest Woman in Bedlam
in a raving Fit, and your Imagination will suggest to you no more than what
really happened.'

'The very next Day, my Aunt left the Place, partly to avoid seeing Mr.
Fitzpatrick or my self, and as much perhaps to avoid seeing any one else; for,
though I am told she has since denied every thing stoutly, I believe she was
then a little confounded at her Disappointment. Since that Time, I have written
to her many Letters; but never could obtain an Answer, which I must own sits
somewhat the heavier, as she herself was, though undesignedly, the Occasion of
all my Sufferings: For had it not been under the Color of paying his Addresses
to her, Mr. Fitzpatrick would never have found sufficient Opportunities to have
engaged my Heart, which, in other Circumstances, I still flatter myself would
not have been an easy Conquest to such a Person. Indeed, I believe, I should
not have erred so grossly in my Choice, if I had relied on my own Judgment; but
I trusted totally to the Opinion of others, and very foolishly took the Merit
of a Man for granted, whom I saw so universally well received by the Women.
What is the Reason, my Dear, that we who have Understandings equal to the
wisest and greatest of the other Sex so often make Choice of the silliest
Fellows for Companions and Favorites? It raises my Indignation to the highest
Pitch, to reflect on the Numbers of Women of Sense who have been undone by
Fools.' Here she paused a Moment; but Sophia making no Answer, she proceeded as
in the next Chapter.

CHAP. V. In which the History of Mrs. Fitzpatrick is continued.
'WE remained at Bath no longer than a Fortnight after our Wedding: For as to
any Reconciliation with my Aunt, there were no Hopes; and of my Fortune, not
one Farthing could be touched till I was at Age, of which I now wanted more
than two Years. My Husband therefore was resolved to set out for Ireland;
against which I remonstrated very earnestly, and insisted on a Promise which he
had made me before our Marriage, that I should never take this Journey against
my Consent; and indeed I never intended to consent to it; nor will any Body, I
believe, blame me for that Resolution; but this, however, I never mentioned to
my Husband, and petitioned only for the Reprieve of a Month; but he had fixed
the Day, and to that Day he obstinately adhered.'

'The Evening before our Departure, as we were disputing this Point with great
Eagerness on both Sides, he started suddenly from his Chair, and left me
abruptly, saying, he was going to the Rooms. He was hardly out of the House,
when I saw a Paper lying on the Floor, which, I suppose, he had carelessly
pulled from his Pocket, together with his Handkerchief. This Paper I took up,
and finding it to be a Letter, I made no Scruple to open and read it, and
indeed I read it so often, that I can repeat it to you almost Word for Word.
This then was he Letter.'

To Mr. Brian Fitzpatrick.
Sir,
YOURS received, and am surprised you should use me in this Manner, as have
never seen any of your Cash, unless for one Linsey Woolsey Coat, and your Bill
now is upwards of 150l. Consider, Sir, how often you have fobbed me off with
your being shortly to be married to this Lady, and the other Lady; but I can
neither live on Hopes or Promises, nor will my Woollen-draper take any such in
Payment. You tell me you are secure of having either the Aunt or the Niece, and
that you might have married the Aunt before this, whose Jointure you say is
immense, but that you prefer the Niece on account of her ready Money. Pray Sir,
take a Fool's Advice for once, and marry the first you can get. You will pardon
my offering my Advice, as you know I sincerely wish you well. Shall draw on you
per next Post, in favor of Messieurs John Drugget and Company, at fourteen
Days, which doubt not your honoring and am,

Sir, Your humble Servant, SAM. COSGRAVE.


'This was the Letter Word for Word. Guess, my dear Girl, guess how this Letter
affected me. You prefer the Niece on account of her Ready Money! If every one
of these Words had been a Dagger, I could with Pleasure have stabbed them into
his Heart; but I will not recount my frantic Behavior on the Occasion. I had
pretty well spent my Tears before his return home; but sufficient Remains of
them appeared in my swollen Eyes. He threw himself sullenly into his Chair, and
for a long Time we were both silent. At length in a haughty Tone, he said, "I
hope, Madam, your Servants have packed up all your Things; for the Coach will
be ready by Six in the Morning." My Patience was totally subdued by this
Provocation, and I answered, No, Sir, there is a Letter still remains unpacked,
and then throwing it on the Table, I fell to upbraiding him with the most
bitter Language I could invent.'

'Whether Guilt, or Shame, or Prudence, restrained him, I cannot say; but though
he is the most passionate of Men, he exerted no Rage on this Occasion. He
endeavored on the contrary to pacify me by the most gentle Means. He swore the
Phrase in the Letter to which I principally objected was not his, nor had he
ever written any such. He owned indeed the having mentioned his Marriage and
that Preference which he had given to myself, but denied with many Oaths the
having assigned any such Reason. And he excused the having mentioned any such
Matter at all, on account of the Straits he was in for Money, arising, he said,
from his having too long neglected his Estate in Ireland. And this, he said,
which he could not bear to discover to me, was the only Reason of his having so
strenuously insisted on our Journey. He then used several endearing
Expressions, and concluded by a very fond Caress, and many violent
Protestations of Love.'

'There was one Circumstance, which, though he did not appeal to it, had much
Weight with me in his Favor, and that was the Word Jointure in the Taylor's
Letter, whereas my Aunt never had been married, and this Mr. Fizpatrick well
knew. -- As I imagined therefore that the Fellow must have inserted this of his
own Head, or from Hearsay, I persuaded myself he might have ventured likewise
on that odious Line on no better Authority. What Reasoning was this, my Dear?
Was I not an Advocate rather than a Judge? -- But why do I mention such a
Circumstance as this, or appeal to it for the Justification of my Forgiveness!
-- In short, had he been guilty of twenty Times as much, half the Tenderness
and Fondness which he used, would have prevailed on me to have forgiven him. I
now made no farther Objections to our setting out, which we did the next
Morning, and in a little more than a Week arrived at the Seat of Mr.
Fitzpatrick.'

'Your Curiosity will excuse me from relating any Occurrences which past during
our Journey: For it would indeed be highly disagreeable to travel it over
again, and no less so to you to travel it over with me.'

'This Seat then, is an ancient Mansion House; If I was in one of those merry
Humors, in which you have so often seen me, I could describe it to you
ridiculously enough. It looked as if it had been formerly inhabited by a
Gentleman. Here was Room enough, and not the less Room on account of the
Furniture: For indeed there was very little in it. An old Woman who seemed
coeval with the Building, and greatly resembled her whom Chamont mentions in
the Orphan, received us at the Gate, and in a Howl scarce human, and to me
unintelligible, welcomed her Master home. In short, the whole Scene was so
gloomy and melancholy, that it threw my Spirits into the lowest Dejection;
which my Husband discerning, instead of relieving, increased, by two or three
malicious Observations. There are good Houses, Madam," says he, "^ you find, in
other Places besides England; b^ perhaps you had rather be in a dirty Lodging ^
Bath.'

'Happy, my Dear, is the Woman, who in an^ State of Life, has a cheerful
good-natured Companion to support and comfort her; but why do reflect on happy
Situations only to aggravate m^ own Misery! My Companion, far from clearing up
the Gloom of Solitude, soon convinced me that I must have been wretched with
him in an^ Place, and in any Condition. In a Word, he wa^ a surly Fellow, a
Character you have perhaps never seen: For indeed no Woman ever sees it
exemplified, but in a Father, a Brother, or a Husband and though you have a
Father, he is not of that Character. This surly Fellow had formerly appeared to
me the very Reverse, and so he did still t^ every other Person. Good Heaven!
how is it possible for a Man to maintain a constant Lie in h^ Appearance abroad
and in Company, and to conten^ himself with showing disagreeable Truth only a
home? Here, my Dear, they make themselves Amends for the uneasy Restraint which
they put o^ their Tempers in the World; for I have observe^ the more merry and
gay, and good-humoured m^ Husband has at any Time been in Company, the more
sullen and morose he was sure to be at ou^ next private Meeting. How shall I
describe hi^ Barbarity? To my Fondness he was cold and insible. My little
comical Ways, which you, m^ Sophy, and which others have called so agreeable he
treated with Contempt. In my most seriou^ Moments he sung and whistled; and
whenever was thoroughly dejected and miserable, he was angry, and abused me:
for though he was never pleased with my good Humor, nor ascribed it to my
Satisfaction in him; yet my low Spirits always of fended him, and those he
imputed to my Repentance of having (as he said) married an Irishman.'

'You will easily conceive, my dear Graveairs; (I ask your Pardon, I really
forgot myself) that when a Woman makes an imprudent Match in the Sense of the
World; that is, when she is not an arrant Prostitute to pecuniary Interest, she
must necessarily have some Inclination and Affection for her Man. You will as
easily believe that this Affection may possibly be lessened; nay, I do assure
you, Contempt will wholly eradicate it. This Contempt I now began to entertain
for my Husband, whom I now discover to be -- I must use the Expression -- an
errant Blockhead. Perhaps you will wonder I did not make this Discovery long
before; but Women will suggest a thousand Excuses to themselves for the Folly
of those they like: Besides, give me Leave to tell you, it requires a most
penetrating Eye to discern a Fool through the Disguises of Gayety and
Good-breeding.'

'It will be easily imagined, that when I once despised my Husband, as I
confess to you I soon did, I must consequently dislike his Company; and indeed
I had the Happiness of being very little troubled with it; for our House was
now most elegantly furnished, our Cellars well stocked, and Dogs and Horses
provided in great Abundance. As my Gentleman therefore entertained his
Neighbors with great Hospitality, so his Neighbors resorted to him with great
Alacrity; and Sports and Drinking consumed so much of his Time, that a small
Part of his Conversation, that is to say, of his Ill-humours, fell to my
Share.'

'Happy would it have been for me, if I could as easily have avoided all other
disagreeable Company; but alas! I was confined to some which constantly
tormented me; and the more, as I saw no Prospect of being relieved from them.
These Companions were my own racking Thoughts, which plagued and in a Manner
haunted me Night and Day. I this Situation I past through a Scene, the Horror
of which can neither be painted nor imagined Think, my Dear, figure, if you
can, to yourself what I must have undergone. I became a Mother by the Man I
scorned, hated, and detested. I we^^ through all the Agonies and Miseries of a
Lying-i^ (ten Times more painful in such a Circumstance than the worst Labor
can be, when one endures for a Man one loves,) in a Desert, or rather indeed a
Scene of Riot and Revel, without a Friend, without a Companion, or without any
of those agreeable Circumstances which often alleviate, and perhaps sometimes
more than compensate the Sufferings of our Sex at this Season.'

CHAP. VI. In which the Mistake of the Landlord throws Sophia into a dreadful
Consternation.
MRS. Fitzpatrick was proceeding in her Narrative, when she was interrupted by
the Entrance of Dinner, greatly to the Concern of Sophia: For the Misfortunes
of her Friend had raised her Anxiety and left her no Appetite, but what Mrs.
Fitzpatrick was to satisfy by her Relation.

The Landlord now attended with a Plate under hi^ Arm, and with the same
Respect in his Countenance and Address, which he would have put on, had the
Ladies arrived in a Coach and Six.

The married Lady seemed less affected with he own Misfortunes than was her
Cousin: For the former eat very heartily, whereas the latter could hardl^
swallow a Morsel. Sophia likewise showed more Concern and Sorrow in her
Countenance than appeared in the other Lady; who having observed the^ Symptoms
in her Friend, begged her to be comforted saying, 'Perhaps all may yet end
better than either you or I expect.

Our Landlord thought he had now an Opportunity ^o open his Mouth, and was
resolved not to omit it. I am sorry, Madam,' cries he, 'that your Ladyship
cannot eat; for to be sure you must be hungry after so long fasting. I hope your
Ladyship is not uneasy at any Thing: For as Madam there says, all may end
better than any body expects. A Gentleman who was here just now, brought
excellent News, and perhaps some Folks who have given other Folks the slip may
get to London before they are overtaken, and if they do, I make no Doubt, but
they will find People who will be very ready to receive them.

All Persons under the Apprehension of Danger, ^onvert whatever they see and
hear into the Objects of that Apprehension. Sophia therefore immediately
^oncluded from the foregoing Speech, that she was ^nown and pursued by her
Father. She was now ^^ruck with the utmost Consternation, and for a few
^linutes deprived of the Power of Speech; which ^e no sooner recovered, than
she desired the Land^ord to send his Servants out of the Room, and then
^ddressing herself to him, said; 'I perceive, Sir, you know who we are; but I
beseech you; -- nay, I am convinced, if you have any Compassion or Goodness,
you will not betray us.

'I betray your Ladyship,' quoth the Landlord! No; (and then he swore several
hearty Oaths) 'I would sooner be cut in ten thousand Pieces. I hate all
Treachery. I! I never betrayed any one in my Life yet, and I am sure I shall
not begin with so sweet a Lady as your Ladyship. All the World would very much
blame me if I should, since it will be in your Ladyship's Power so shortly to
reward me. My Wife can Witness for me, I knew 0your Ladyship the Moment you
came into the House: I said it was your Honor, before I lifted you from your
Horse, and I shall carry the Bruises I got in your Ladyship's Service to the
Grave; but what signified that, as long as I saved your Ladyship. To be sure
some People this Morning would have thought of getting a Reward; but no such*
Thought ever entered into my Head. I would sooner starve than take any Reward
for betraying your Ladyship.'

'I promise you, Sir, says Sophia, if it be ever in my Power to reward you, you
shall not lose by your Generosity.'

'Alack-a-day, Madam!' answered the Landlord, in your Ladyship's Power! Heaven
put it as much into your Will. I am only afraid your Honor will forget such a
poor Man as an Innkeeper; but if your Ladyship should not; I hope you will
remember what Reward I refused -- refused ^ that is I would have refused, and
to be sure it may be called refusing; for I might have had it certainly, and to
be sure you might have been in some Houses; -- but for my Part, I would not
methinks for the World have your Lady-ship wrong me so much, as to imagine I
ever thought of betraying you, even before I heard the good News. What News
pray?' says Sophia, somewhat eagerly.'

'Hath not your Ladyship heard it then?' cries the Landlord, nay, like enough:
For I heard it only a few Minutes ago; and if I had never heard it, may the
Devil fly away with me this Instant, if I would have betrayed your Honor; no,
if I would, may I -- Here he subjoined several dreadful Execrations which
Sophia at last interrupted, and begged to know what he meant by the News.' --
He was going to answer, when Mrs. Honor came running into the Room, all pale
and breathless, and cried out, 'Madam, we are all undone, all ruined, they are
come, they are come!' These Words almost froze up the ^^ood of Sophia; but Mrs.
Fitzpatrick asked Ho^^ur, who are come? -- 'Who? answered she, why the French;
several hundred thousands of them are landed, and we shall be all murdered and
ravished.'

As a Miser, who has in some well built City a Cottage value twenty Shillings,
when at a Distance ^e is alarmed with the News of a Fire, turns pale and
^embles at his Loss; but when he finds the beau^^ful Palaces only are burnt,
and his own Cottage retains safe, he comes instantly to himself and smiles this
good Fortune: Or as (for we dislike something ^^ the former Simile) the tender
Mother, when ter^^fied with the Apprehension that her darling Boy is towned, is
struck senseless and almost dead with Consternation; but when she is told that
little Master ^ safe, and the Victory only with twelve hundred ^ave Men gone to
the Bottom, Life and Sense again ^eturn, maternal Fondness enjoys the sudden
Relief from all its Fears, and the general Benevolence which a another Time
would have deeply felt the dreadful ^^astrophe, lies fast asleep in her Mind.

So Sophia, than whom none was more capable of ^^derly feeling the general
Calamity of her Country, ^^nd such immediate Satisfaction from the Relief ^f
those Terrors she had of being overtaken by her ^^ther, that the Arrival of the
French scarce made my Impression on her. She gently chid her Maid ^^ the Fright
into which she had thrown her; and (...), 'she was glad it was no worse; for
that she had feared somebody else was come.'

'Ay, ay,' quoth the Landlord smiling, 'her Ladyship knows better things; she
knows the French are our very best Friends, and come over hither only for our
good. They are the People who are to make old England flourish again. I warrant
her Honor thought the Duke was coming ^ and that was enough to put her into a
Fright. I was going to tell your Ladyship the News. -- His Honor's Majesty,
Heaven bless him, has given the Duke the slip; and is marching as fast as he
can to London, and ten thousand French are landed to join him on the Road.'

Sophia was not greatly pleased with this News, nor with the Gentleman who
related it; but as she still imagined he knew her (for she could not possibly
have any Suspicion of the real Truth) she durst no show any Dislike. And now
the Landlord, having removed the Cloth from the Table, withdrew; but at his
Departure frequently repeated his Hopes of being remembered hereafter.

The Mind of Sophia was not at all easy under the Supposition of being known at
this House; for she still applied to herself many Things which the Landlord had
addressed to Jenny Cameron; she therefore ordered her Maid to pump out of him
by what Means he had become acquainted with her Person, and who had offered him
the Reward for betraying her; she likewise ordered the Horses to be in
Readiness by four in the Morning, at which Hour Mrs. Fitzpatrick promised to
bear her Company, and then composing herself as well as she could, she desired
that Lady to continue her Story.

CHAP. VII. In which Mrs. Fitzpatrick concludes her History.
WHILE Mrs. Honor, in Pursuance of the Commands of her Mistress, ordered a
Bowl of Punch, and invited my Landlord and Landlay to partake of it, Mrs.
Fitzpatrick thus went on with her Relation.

'Most of the Officers who were quartered at a Town in our Neighborhood were
of my Husband's Acquaintance. Among these was a Lieutenant, a very pretty Sort
of Man, and who was married to a Woman who was so agreeable both in her Temper
and Conversation, that from our first knowing each other, which was soon after
my Lying-in, we were almost inseparable Companions; for I had the good Fortune
to make myself equally agreeable to her.'

'The Lieutenant who was neither a Sot nor a Sportsman, was frequently of our
Parties; indeed he was very little with my Husband, and no more than
good-Breeding constrained him to be, as he lived almost constantly at our
House. My Husband often expressed much dissatisfaction at the Lieutenant's
preferring my Company to his; he was very angry with me on that Account, and
gave me many a hearty Curse for drawing away his Companions; saying, "I ought
to be d -- ned for having spoiled one of the prettiest Fellows in the World, by
making a Milk-sop of him.'

'You will be mistaken, my dear Sophia, if you imagine that the Anger of my
Husband arose from my depriving him of a Companion; for the Lieutenant was not
a Person with whose Society a Fool could be pleased; and if I should admit the
Possibility of this, so little Right had my Husband to place the Loss of his
Companion to me, that I am convinced it was my Conversation alone which induced
him ever to come to the House. No, Child, it was Envy, the worst and most
rancorous Kind of Envy, the Envy of Superiority of Understanding. The Wretch
could not bear to see my Conversation preferred to his, by a Man of whom he
could not entertain the least Jealousy. O my dear Sophy, you are a Woman of
Sense; if you marry a Man, as is most probable you will, of less Capacity than
yourself, make frequent Trials of his Temper before Marriage, and see whether
he can bear to submit to such a Superiority. -- Promise me Sophy, you will take
this Advice; for you will hereafter find its Importance.' 'It is very likely I
shall never marry at all,' answered Sophia; 'I think, at least, I shall never
marry a Man in whose Understanding I see any Defects before Marriage; and I
promise you I would rather give up my own, than see any such afterward.' --
'Give up your Understanding!' replied Mrs. Fitzpatrick, 'Oh fie, Child, I will
not believe so meanly of you. Every thing else I might myself be brought to
give up; but never this. Nature would not have allotted this Superiority to the
Wife in so many Instances, if she intended we should have all surrendered it to
the Husband. This indeed Men of Sense never expect of us; of which the
Lieutenant I have just mentioned was one notable Example; for though he had a
very good Understanding, he always acknowledged (as was really true) that his
Wife had a better. And this, perhaps, was one Reason of the Hatred my Tyrant
bore her.'

'Before he would be so governed by a Wife,' he said, especially such an ugly B
-- (for indeed she was not a regular Beauty, but very agreeable, and extremely
genteel) he would see all the Women upon Earth at the Devil, which was a very
usual Phrase with him.' He said, 'he wondered what I could see in her to be so
charmed with her Company: since this Woman, says he, 'hath come among us, there
is an End of your beloved Reading, which you pretended to like so much, that
you could not afford Time to return the Visits of the Ladies, in this Country;
and I must confess I had been guilty of a little Rudeness this Way; for the
Ladies there are at least no better than the mere Country Ladies here, and I
think, I need make no other Excuse to you for declining any Intimacy with
them.'

'This Correspondence however continued a whole Year, even all the while the
Lieutenant was quartered in that Town; for which I was contented to pay the Tax
of being constantly abused in the Manner abovementioned by my Husband; I mean
when he was at home; for he was frequently absent a Month at a Time at Dublin,
and once made a Journey of two Months to London; in all which Journeys I
thought it a very singular Happiness that he never once desired my Company;
nay, by his frequent Censures on Men who could not travel, as he phrased it,
without a Wife tied up to their Tail, he sufficiently intimated that had I been
never so desirous of accompanying him, my Wishes would have been in vain; but,
Heaven knows, such Wishes were very far from my Thoughts.'

'At length my Friend was removed from me, and I was again left to my Solitude,
to the tormenting Conversation with my own Reflections, and to apply to Books
for my only Comfort. I now read almost all Day long. -- How many Books do you
think I read in three Months?' 'I cannot guess, indeed, Cousin,' answered
Sophia. -- 'Perhaps half a Score!' 'Half a Score! half a thousand, Child,'
answered the other. 'I read a good deal in Daniel's English History of France;
a great deal in Plutarch's Lives; the Atalantis, Pope's Homer, Dryden's Plays,
Chillingworth, the Countess. D' Anois, and Lock's Human Understanding.'

'During this Interval I wrote three very supplicating, and, I thought, moving
Letters to my Aunt; but as I received no Answer to any of them, my Disdain
would not suffer me to continue my Application.' -- Here she stopped, and looking
earnestly at Sophia, said, 'Methinks my Dear, I read something in your Eyes
which reproaches me of a Neglect in another Place, where I should have met with
a kinder Return.' 'Indeed, dear Harriet,' answered Sophia, your Story is an
Apology for any Neglect; but indeed I feel that I have been guilty of a
Remissness, without so good an Excuse. -- Yet pray proceed; for I long, though I
tremble, to hear the End.'

Thus then Mrs. Fitzpatrick resumed her Narrative. 'My Husband now took a
second Journey to England, where he continued upwards of three Months. During
the greater Part of this Time, I led a Life which nothing but having led a
worse, could make me think tolerable; for perfect Solitude can never be
reconciled to a social Mind, like mine, but when it relieves you from the
Company of those you hate. What added to my Wretchedness, was the Loss of my
little Infant: Not that I pretend to have had for it that extravagant
Tenderness of which I believe I might have been capable under other
Circumstances; but I resolved, in every Instance, to discharge the Duty of the
tenderest Mother, and this Care prevented me from feeling the Weight of that,
heaviest of all Things, when it can be at all said to lie heavy on our Hands.'

'I had spent full ten Weeks almost entirely by myself, having seen no body all
that Time, except my Servants, and a very few Visitors, when a young Lady, a
Relation of my Husband, came from a distant Part of Ireland to visit me. She
had staid once before a Week at my House, and I then gave her a pressing
Invitation to return; for she was a very agreeable Woman, and had improved good
natural Parts by a proper Education. Indeed she was to me a most welcome
Guest.'

'A few Days after her Arrival, perceiving me in very low Spirits, without
enquiring the Cause, which indeed she very well knew, the young Lady fell to
compassionating my Case. She said, 'Tho' Politeness had prevented me from
complaining of my Husband's Behavior to his Relations, yet they all were very
sensible of it, and felt great Concern upon that Account; but none more than
herself;" and after some general Discourse on this Head, which I own I could
not forbear Countenancing; at last, after much previous Precaution, and
enjoined Concealment, she communicated to me, as a profound Secret -- that my
Husband kept a Mistress.'

'You will certainly imagine, I heard this News with the utmost Insensibility
-- Upon my Word, if you do, your Imagination will mislead you. Contempt had not
so kept down my Anger to my Husband; but that Hatred rose again on this
occasion. What can be the Reason of this? Are we so abominably selfish, that we
can be concerned at others having the Possession even of what we despise? Or
are we not rather abominably vain, and is not this the greatest Injury done to
our Vanity? What think you, Sophia?'

'I don't know, indeed,' answered Sophia, 'I have never troubled myself with
any of these deep Contemplations; but I think the Lady did very ill in
communicating to you such a Secret.'

'And yet, my Dear, this Conduct is natural,' replied Mrs. Fitzpatrick; 'and
when you have seen and read as much as myself, you will acknowledge it to be
so.'

'I am sorry to hear it is natural,' returned Sophia; for I want neither
Reading nor Experience, to convince me, that it is very dishonorable and very
illnatur'd: Nay, it is surely as ill-bred to tell a Husband or Wife of the
Faults of each other, as to tell them of their own.'

'Well,' continued Mrs. Fitzpatrick, 'my Husband at last returned; and if I am
thoroughly acquainted with my own Thoughts, I hated him now more than ever; but
I despised him rather less: For certainly nothing so much weakens our Contempt,
as an Injury done to our Pride or our Vanity.'

'He now assumed a Carriage to me, so very different from what he had lately
worn, and so nearly resembling his Behavior the first Week of our Marriage,
that had I now had any Spark of Love remaining, he might, possibly, have
rekindled my Fondness for him. But though Hatred may succeed to Contempt, and
may, perhaps, get the better of it, Love, I believe, cannot. The Truth is, the
Passion of Love is too restless to remain conconted, without the Gratification
which it receives from its Object; and one can no more be inclined to love
without loving, than we can have Eyes without seeing. When a Husband,
therefore, ceases to be the Object of this Passion, it is most probable some
other Man -- I say, my dear, if your Husband grows indifferent to you -- if you
once come to despise him -- I say, -- that is, -- if you have the Passion of
Love in you -- Lud! I have bewildered myself so -- but one is apt, in these
abstracted Considerations, to lose the Concatenation of Ideas, as Mr. Lock
says. -- In short the Truth is -- In short, I scarce know what it is; but, as I
was saying, my Husband returned, and his Behavior, at first, greatly surprised
me; but he soon acquainted me with the Motive, and taught me to account for it.
In a Word, then, he had spent and lost all the ready Money of my Fortune; and
as he could mortgage his own Estate no deeper, he was now desirous to supply
himself with Cash for his Extravagance, by selling a little Estate of mine,
which he could not do without my Assistance; and to obtain this Favor was the
whole and sole Motive of all the Fondness which he now put on.'

'With this I peremptorily refused to comply. I told him, and I told him truly,
that had I been possessed of the Indies at our first Marriage, he might have
commanded it all: For it had been a constant Maxim with me, that where a Woman
disposes of her Heart, she should always deposite her Fortune; but as he had
been so kind, long ago, to restore the former into my Possession, I was
resolved, likewise, to retain what little remained of the latter.'

'I will not describe to you the Passion into which these Words, and the
resolute Air in which they were spoken, threw him: Nor will I trouble you with
the whole Scene which succeeded between us. Out came, you may be well assured,
the Story of the Mistress; and out it did come, with all the Embellishments
which Anger and Disdain could bestow upon it.'

'Mr. Fitzatrick seemed a little Thunderstruck with this, and more confused
than I had seen him; though his Ideas are always confused enough, Heaven knows.
He did not, however, endeavor to exculpate himself; but took a Method which
almost equally confounded me. What was this but Recrimination! He affected to
be jealous; -- he may, for ought I know, be inclined enough to Jealousy in his
natural Temper: Nay, he must have had it from Nature, or the Devil must have
put it into his Head: For I defy all the World to cast a just Aspersion on my
Character: Nay, the most scandalous Tongues have never dared censure my
Reputation. My Fame, I thank Heaven, has been always as spotless as my Life;
and let Falsehood itself accuse that, if it dare. No, my dear Graveairs, however
provoked, however ill treated, however injured in my Love, I have firmly
resolved never to give the least Room for Censure on this Account. -- And yet,
my dear, there are some People so malicious, some Tongues so venomous, that no
Innocence can escape them. The most undesigned Word, the most accidental Look,
the least Familiarity, or most innocent Freedom, will be misconstrued, and
magnified into I know not what, by some People. But I despise, my dear
Graveairs, I despise all such Slander. No such Malice, I assure you, ever gave
me an uneasy Moment. No, no, I promise you, I am above all that. -- But where
was I; O let me see, I told you, my Husband was jealous -- And of whom pray? --
Why of whom but the Lieutenant I mentioned to you before. He was obliged to
resort above a Year and more back, to find an Object for this unaccountable
Passion, if, indeed, he really felt any such, and was not an errant
Counterfeit, in order to abuse me.'

'But I have tired you already with too many Particulars. I will now bring my
Story to a very speedy Conclusion. In short, then, after many Scenes very
unworthy to be repeated, in which my Cousin engaged so heartily on my Side,
that Mr. Fitzpatrick at last turned her out of Doors; when he found I was
neither to be soothed nor bullied into Compliance, he took a very violent
Method indeed. Perhaps you will conclude he beat me; but this, though he has
approached very near to it, he never actually did. He confined me to my Room,
without suffering me to have either Pen, Ink, Paper, or Book; and a Servant
every Day made my Bed, and brought me my Food.'

'When I had remained a Week under this Imprisonment, he made me a Visit, and,
with the Voice of a Schoolmaster, or, what is often much the same, a Tyrant,
asked me, "If I would yet comply?" I answered very stoutly, "That I would die
first." Then so you shall, and be d -- n'd," cries he; for you shall never go
alive out of this Room.'

'Here I remained a Fortnight longer; and, to say the Truth, my Constancy was
almost subdued, and I began to think of Submission; when one Day in the Absence
of my Husband, who was gone abroad for some short Time, by the greatest good
Fortune in the World, an Accident happened. -- I -- at a Time when I began to
give Way to the utmost Despair -- every Thing would be excusable at such a Time
-- at that very Time I received -- But it would take up an Hour to tell you all
Particulars -- In one Word, then, (for I will not tire you with Circumstances)
Gold, the common Key to all Padlocks, opened my Door, and set me at Liberty.'

'I now made Haste to Dublin, where I immediately procured a Passage to
England; and was proceeding to Bath, in Order to throw myself into the
Protection of my Aunt, or of your Father, or of any Relation who would afford
it me. My Husband overtook me last Night, at the Inn where I lay, and which you
left a few Minutes before me; but I had the good Luck to escape him, and to
follow you.'

'And thus, my Dear, ends my History: A tragical one, I am sure, it is to
myself; but, perhaps, I ought rather to apologize to you for its Dullness.'
Sophia heaved a deep Sigh, and answered, 'Indeed, Harriet, I pity you from my
Soul; -- But what could you expect? Why, why, would you marry an Irishman?'

'Upon my Word,' replied her Cousin, 'your Censure is unjust. There are, among
the Irish, Men of as much Worth and Honor, as any among the English: Nay, to
speak the Truth, Generosity of Spirit is rather more common among them. I have
known some Examples there too of good Husbands: and, I believe, these are not
very plenty in England. Ask me, rather, what I could expect when I married a
Fool; and I will tell you a solemn Truth; I did not know him to be so.' -- 'Can
no Man,' said Sophia, in a very low and altered Voice, do you think, make a bad
Husband, who is not a Fool?' 'That,' answered the other, 'is too general a
Negative; but none, I believe, is so likely as a Fool to prove so. Among my
Acquaintance, the silliest Fellows are the worst Husbands; and I will venture
to assert, as a Fact, that a Man of Sense rarely behaves very ill to a Wife,
who deserves very well.'

CHAP. VIII. A dreadful Alarm in the Inn, with the Arrival of an unexpected
Friend of Mrs. Fitzpatrick.
SOPHIA now at the Desire of her Cousin, related -- not what follows, but what
has gone before in this History: For which reason the Reader will, I suppose,
excuse me, for not repeating it over again.

One Remark, however, I cannot forbear making on her Narrative, namely, that
she made no more mention of Jones, from the Beginning to the End, than if there
had been no such Person alive. This I will neither endeavor to account for,
nor to excuse. Indeed, if this may be called a Kind of Dishonesty, it seems the
more inexcusable, from the apparent Openness and explicit Sincerity of the
other Lady. -- But so it was.

Just as Sophia arrived at the Conclusion of her Story, there arrived in the
Room where the two Ladies were sitting, a Noise, not unlike, in Loudness, to
that of a Pack of Hounds just let out from their Kennel; nor, in Shrillness, to
Cats when caterwauling; or to Screech-Owls; or, indeed, more like (for what
Animal can resemble a human Voice) to those Sounds, which, in the pleasant
Mansions of that Gate, which seems to derive its Name from a Duplicity of
Tongues, issue from the Mouths, and sometimes from the Nostrils of those fair
River Nymphs, yeleped of old the Napaeae, or the Naiades; in the vulgar Tongue
translated Oyster-Wenches: For when, instead of the ancient Libations of Milk
and Honey and Oil, the rich Distillation from the Juniper-Berry, or, perhaps,
from Malt, has, by the early Devotion of their Votaries, been poured forth
into great Abundance, should any daring Tongue, with unhallowed License
profane; i. e. depreciate the delicate fat Milton Oyster, the Plaice sound and
firm, the Flounder as much alive as when in the Water, the Shrimp as big as a
Prawn, the fine Cod alive but a few Hours ago, or any other of the various
Treasures, which those Water Deities, who fish the Sea and Rivers, have
committed to the Care of the Nymphs, the angry Naiades lift up their immortal
Voices, and the profane Wretch is struck deaf for his Impiety.

Such was the Noise, which now burst from one of the Rooms below; and soon the
Thunder, which ^ong had rattled at a Distance, began to approach nearer and
nearer, 'till, having ascended by Degrees up Stairs, it at last entered the
Apartment where the Ladies were. In short, to drop all Metaphor and Figure,
Mrs. Honor having scolded violently below Stairs, and continued the same all
the Way up, came ^n to her Mistress in a most outrageous Passion, crying out,
'What does your Ladyship think? Would you imagine, that this impudent Villain,
the Master of this House, has had the Impudence to tell me, nay, to stand it
out to my Face, that your Ladyship is that nasty, stinking Wh -- re, (Jenny
Cameron they call her) that runs about the Country with the Pretender? Nay, the
lying, fancy Villain, had the Assurance to tell me, that your Ladyship had
owned yourself to be so: But I have clawed the Rascal; I have left the Marks of
my Nails in his impudent Face. My Lady!' says I, 'you fancy Scoundrel: My Lady
is Meat for no Pretenders. She is a young Lady of as good Fashion, and Family,
and Fortune, as any in Somersetshire. Did you never hear of the great Squire
Western, Sirrah? She is his only Daughter; she is, -- and Heiress to all his
great Estate. My Lady to be called a nasty Scotch Wh -- re by such a Varlet --
To be sure, I wish I had knocked his Brains out with the Punch-bowl.'

The principal Uneasiness with which Sophia was affected on this Occasion,
Honor had herself caused, by having in her Passion discovered who she was.
However, as this Mistake of the Landlord sufficiently accounted for those
Passages which Sophia had before mistaken, she acquired some Ease on that
Account; nor could she upon the whole, forbear smiling. This enraged Honor,
and she cried, 'Indeed, Madam, I did not think your Ladyship would have made a^
laughing Matter of it. To be called Whore by such an impudent low Rascal. Your
Ladyship may be angry with me, for ought I know, for taking your Part, since
proferred Service, they say, stinks; but to be sure I could never bear to hear
a Lady of mine called Whore. -- Nor will I bear it. I am sure your Ladyship is
as virtuous a Lady as ever sat Foot on English Ground, and I will claw any
Villain's Eyes out who dares for to offer to presume for to say the least Word
to the contrary. No body ever could say the least ill of the Character of any
Lady that ever I waited upon.'

Hinc illae Lachrymae; in plain Truth, Honor had as much Love for her Mistress
as most Servants have, that is to say -- But besides this, her Pride obliged
her to support the Character of the Lady she waited on; for she thought her own
was in a very close Manner connected with it. In Proportion as the Character of
her Mistress was raised, hers likewise, as she conceived, was raised with it;
and, on the contrary, she thought the one could not be lowered without the
other.

On this Subject, Reader, I must stop a Moment to tell thee a Story. 'The
famous Nell Gwynn, stepping one Day from a House where she had made a short
Visit in her Coach, saw a great Mob assembled, and her Footman all bloody and
dirty; the Fellow being asked, by his Mistress, the Reason of his being in that
Condition, answered, 'I have been fighting, Madam, with an impudent Rescal who
called your Ladyship a Wh -- re. 'You Blockhead,' replied Mrs. Gwynn, 'at this
Rate you must fight every Day of your Life; why, you Fool, all the World knows
it.' "Do they?" cries the Fellow, in a muttering Voice, after he had shut the
Coach Door, 'they shall not call me a Whore's Footman for all that.'

Thus the Passion of Mrs. Honor appears natural enough, even if it were to be
no otherwise accounted for; but in reality, there was another Cause of her
Anger; for which we must beg Leave to remind our Reader of a Circumstance
mentioned in the above Simile. There are indeed certain Liquors, which being
applied to our Passions, or to Fire, produce Effects the very Reverse of those
produced by Water, as they serve to kindle and inflame, rather than to
extinguish. Among these, the generous Liquor called Punch is one. It was not
therefore without Reason, that the learned Dr. Cheney used to call drinking
Punch pouring liquid Fire down your Throat.

Now Mrs. Honor had unluckily poured so much of this liquid Fire down her
Throat, that the Smoke of it began to ascend into her Pericranium, and blinded
the Eyes of Reason which is there supposed to keep her Residence, while the
Fire itself from the Stomach easily reached the Heart, and there inflamed the
noble Passion of Pride. So that upon the whole, we shall cease to wonder at the
violent Rage of the Waiting Woman; though at first Sight we must confess the
Cause seems inadequate to the Effect.

Sophia and her Cousin both, did all in their Power to extinguish these Flames
which had roared so loudly all over the House. They at length prevailed; or, to
carry the Metaphor one Step farther, the Fire having consumed all the Fuel
which the Language affords, to wit, every reproachful Term in it, at last went
out of its own Accord.

But though Tranquillity was restored above Stairs, it was not so below; where my
Landlady highly resenting the Injury done to the Beauty of her Husband, by the
Flesh-Spades of Mrs. Honor, called aloud for Revenge and Justice. As to the
poor Man who had principally suffered in the Engagement, he was perfectly
quiet. Perhaps the Blood which he lost might have cooled his Anger: For the
Enemy had not only applied her Nails to his Cheeks, but likewise her Fist to
his Nostils, which lamented the Blow with Tears of Blood in great Abundance. To
this we may add Reflections on his Mistake; but indeed nothing so effectually
silenced his Resentment, as the Manner in which he now discovered his Error;
for as to the Behavior of Mrs. Honor, it had the more confirmed him in his
Opinion: but he was now assured by a Person of great Figure, and who was
attended by a great Equipage, that one of the Ladies was a Woman of Fashion,
and his intimate Acquaintance.

By the Orders of this Person, the Landlord now ascended, and acquainted our
fair Travelers, that a great Gentleman below desired to do them the Honor of
waiting on them. Sophia turned pale, and trembled at this Message, though the
Reader will conclude it was too civil, notwithstanding the Landlord's Blunder,
to have come from her Father; but Fear has the common Fault of a Justice of
Peace, and is apt to conclude hastily from every slight Circumstance, without
examining the Evidence on both Sides.

To ease the Reader's Curiosity, therefore, rather than his Apprehensions, we
proceed to inform him, that an Irish Peer had arrived very late that Evening at
the Inn in his Way to London. This Nobleman having sallied from his Supper at
the Hurricane before commemorated, had seen the Attendant of Mrs. Fitzpatrick,
and upon a short Enquiry was informed, that her Lady, with whom he was very
particularly acquainted was above. This Information he had no sooner received,
than he addressed himself to the Landlord, pacified him, and sent him up Stairs
with Compliments rather civiler than those which were delivered.

It may perhaps be wondered at, that the Waiting Woman herself was not the
Messenger employed on this Occasion; but we are sorry to say, she was not at
present qualified for that, or indeed for any other Office. The Rum (for so the
Landlord chose to call the Distillation from Malt) had basely taken the
Advantage of the Fatigue which the poor Woman had undergone, and had made
terrible Depredations on her noble Faculties, at a Time when they were very
unable to resist the Attack.

We shall not describe this tragical Scene too fully; but we thought ourselves
obliged by that historic Integrity which we profess, shortly to hint a Matter
which we would otherwise have been glad to have spared. Many Historians indeed,
for Want of this Integrity, or of Diligence, to say no worse, often leave the
Reader to find out these little Circumstances in the Dark, and sometimes to his
great Confusion and Perplexity.

Sophia was very soon eased of her causeless Fright by the Entry of the noble
Peer, who was not only an intimate Acquaintance of Mrs. Fitzpatrick; but in
reality a very particular Friend of that Lady. To say Truth, it was by his
Assistance, that she had been enabled to escape from her Husband; for this
Nobleman had the same gallant Disposition with those renowned Knights, of whom
we read in heroic Story, and had delivered many an imprisoned Nymph from
Durance. He was indeed as bitter an Enemy to the savage Authority too often
exercised by Husbands and Fathers, over the young and lovely of the other Sex,
as ever Knight Errant was to the barbarous Power of Enchanters: nay, to say
Truth, I have often suspected that those very Enchanters with which Romance
every where abounds, were in reality no other than the Husbands of those Days:
and Matrimony itself was perhaps the enchanted Castle in which the Nymphs were
said to be confined.

This Nobleman had an Estate in the Neighborhood of Fitzpatrick, and had been
for some Time acquainted with the Lady. No sooner therefore did he hear of her
Confinement, than he earnestly applied himself to procure her Liberty; which he
presently effected, not by storming the Castle, according to the Example of
ancient Heroes; but by corrupting the Governor, in Conformity with the modern
Art of War; in which Craft is held to be preferable to Valor, and Gold is
found to be more irresistible than either Lead or Steel.

This Circumstance, however, as the Lady did not think it material enough to
relate to her Friend, we would not at that Time impart it to the Reader. We
rather chose to leave him a while under a Supposition, that she had found, or
coined, or by some very extraordinary, perhaps supernatural Means, had
possessed herself of the Money with which she had bribed her Keeper, than to
interrupt her Narrative by giving a Hint of what seemed to her of too little
Importance to be mentioned.

The Peer after a short Conversation, could not forbear expressing some
Surprise at meeting the Lady in that Place, nor could he refrain from telling
her, he imagined she had been gone to Bath. Mrs. Fitzpatrick very freely
answered, 'That she had been prevented in her Purpose by the Arrival of a
Person she need not mention. In short,' says she, 'I was overtaken by my
Husband (for I need not affect to conceal what the World knows too well
already.) I had the good Fortune to escape in a most surprising Manner, and am
now going to London with this young Lady, who is a near Relation of mine, and
who has escaped from as great a Tyrant as my own.'

His Lordship concluding that this Tyrant was likewise a Husband, made a
Speech, full of Compliments to both the Ladies, and as full of Invectives
against his own Sex; nor indeed did he avoid some oblique Glances at the
matrimonial Institution itself, and at the unjust Powers given by it to Man
over the more sensible, and more meritorious Part of the Species. He ended his
Oration with an Offer of his Protection, and of his Coach and Six, which was
instantly accepted by Mrs. Fitzpatrick, and at last, upon her Persuasions, by
Sophia.

Matters being thus adjusted, his Lordship took his Leave, and the Ladies
retired to Rest, where Mrs. Fitzpatrick entertained her Cousin with many high
Encomiums on the Character of the noble Peer, and enlarged very particularly on
his great Fondness for his Wife; saying, she believed he was almost the only
Person of his Rank, who was entirely constant to the Marriage Bed. 'Indeed,
added she, my dear Sophy, that is a very rare Virtue amongst Men of Condition.
Never expect it when you marry; for, believe me, if you do, you will certainly
be deceived.'

A gentle Sigh stole from Sophia at these Words, which perhaps contributed to
form a Dream of no very pleasant Kind; but as she never revealed this Dream to
any one, so the Reader cannot expect to see it related here.

CHAP. IX. The Morning introduced in some pretty Writing. A Stage Coach. The
Civility of Chambermaids. The heroic Temper of Sophia. Her Generosity. The
Return to it. The Departure of the Company, and their Arrival at London; with
some Remarks for the Use of Travelers.
THOSE Members of the Society, who are born to furnish the Blessings of Life,
now began to light their Candles, in order to pursue their daily Labors, for
the Use of those who are born to enjoy these Blessings. The sturdy Hind now
attends the Levee of his Fellow Labourer the OX; the cunning Artificer, the
diligent mechanic spring from their hard Mattress; and now the bonny House-maid
begins to repair the disordered Drum-Room, while the riotous Authors of that
Disorder, in broken interrupted Slumbers, tumble and toss, as if the Hardness
of Down disquieted their Repose.

In simple Phrase, the Clock had no sooner struck Seven, than the Ladies were
ready for their Journey, and at their Desire, his Lordship and his Equipage
were prepared to attend them.

And now a Matter of some Difficulty arose; and this was how his Lordship
himself should be conveyed: For though in Stage Coaches, where Passengers are
properly considered as so much Luggage, the ingenious Coachman stows half a
Dozen with perfect Ease into the Place of four: for well he contrives that the
fat Hostess, or well-fed Alderman, may take up no more Room than the slim Miss,
or taper Master; it being the Nature of Guts, when well squeezed, to give Way,
and to lie in a narrow Compass; yet in these Vehicles which are called, for
Distinctionsake, Gentlemen's Coaches, though they are often larger than the
others, this Method of packing is never attempted.

His Lordship would have put a short End to the Difficulty, by very gallantly
desiring to mount his Horse; but Mrs. Fitzpatrick would by no Means consent to
it. It was therefore concluded that the Abigails should by Turns relieve each
other on one of his Lordship's Horses, which was presently equipped with a
Side-Saddle for that Purpose.

Every thing being settled at the Inn, the Ladies discharged their former
Guides, and Sophia made a present to the Landlord, partly to repair the Bruise
which he had received under herself, and partly on Account of what he had
suffered under the Hands of her enraged Waiting Woman. And now Sophia first
discovered a Loss which gave her some Uneasiness; and this was of the hundred
Pound Bank Bill which her Father had given her at their last Meeting; and
which, within a very inconsiderable Trifle, was all the Treasure she was at
present worth. She searched every where, and shook and tumbled all her Things
to no Purpose, the Bill was not to be found: And she was at last fully
persuaded that she had lost it from her Pocket when she had the Misfortune of
tumbling from her Horse in the dark Lane, as before recorded. A Fact that
seemed the more probable, as she now recollected some Discomposure in her
Pockets which had happened at that Time, and the great Difficulty with which
she had drawn forth her Handkerchief the very Instant before her Fall, in order
to relieve the Distress of Mrs. Fitzpatrick.

Misfortunes of this Kind, whatever Inconveniences they may be attended with,
are incapable of subduing a Mind in which there is any Strength, without the
Assistance of Avarice. Sophia therefore, though nothing could be worse timed than
this Accident, at such a Season, immediately got the better of her Concern, and
with her wonted Serenity and Cheerfulness of Countenance, returned to her
Company. His Lordship conducted the Ladies into the Vehicle, as he did likewise
Mrs. Honor, who, after many Civilities, and more Dear Madams, at last yielded
to the well-bred Importunities of her Sister Abigail, and submitted to be
complimented with the first Ride in the Coach; in which indeed she would
afterward have been contented to have pursued her whole Journey, had not her
Mistress, after several fruitless Intimations, at length forced her to take her
Turn on Horseback.

The Coach now having received its Company, began to move forwards, attended by
many Servants, and by two led Captains, who had before rode with his Lordship,
and who would have been dismissed from the Vehicle upon a much less worthy
Occasion, than was this of accommodating two Ladies. In this they acted only as
Gentlemen; but they were ready at any Time to have performed the Office of a
Footman, or indeed would have condescended lower, for the Honor of his
Lordship's Company, and for the Convenience of his Table.

My Landlord was so pleased with the Present he had received from Sophia, that
he rather rejoiced in than regretted his Bruise, or his Scratches. The Reader
will perhaps be curious to know the Quantum of this Present, but we cannot
satisfy his Curiosity. Whatever it was, it satisfied the Landlord for his
bodily Hurt; but he lamented he had not known before how little the Lady valued
her Money; 'For to be sure,' says he, 'one might have charged every Article
double, and she would have made no Cavil at the Reckoning.'

His Wife however was far from drawing this Conclusion; whether she really felt
any Injury done to her Husband more than he did himself, I will not say;
certain it is, she was much less satisfied with the Generosity of Sophia.
Indeed,' cries she, 'my Dear, the Lady knows better how to dispose of her Money
than you imagine. She might very well think we should not put up such a
Business without some Satisfaction, and the Law would have cost her an infinite
deal more than this poor little Matter, which I wonder you would take.' 'You
are always so bloodily wise,' quoth the Husband, 'It would have cost her more,
would it? Do fancy I don't know that as well as thee? But would any of that
more, or so much, have come into our Pockets? Indeed, if Son Tom the Lawyer had
been alive, I could have been glad to have put such a pretty Business into his
Hands. He would have got a good Picking out of it; but I have no Relation now
who is a Lawyer, and why should I go to Law for the Benefit of Strangers? Nay,
to be sure,' answered she, you must know best.' 'I believe I do,' replied ^e.
'I fancy when Money is to be got, I can smell it out as well as another. Every
body, let me tell you, would not have talked People out of this. Mind that, I
say, every body would not have cajoled this out of her, mind that.' The Wife
then ^oined in the Applause of her Husband's Sagacity; and thus ended the short
Dialogue between them on his Occasion.

We will therefore take our Leave of these good People; and attend his Lordship
and his fair Companions, who made such good Expedition, that they performed a
Journey of ninety Miles in two Days, and on the second Evening arrived in
London, without having encountered any one Adventure on the Road worthy the
Dignity of this History to relate. Our Pen, therefore, shall imitate the
Expedition which describes, and our History shall keep Pace with the Travelers
who are its Subject. Good Writers will ^ndeed do well to imitate the ingenious
Traveller in his Instance, who always proportions his Stay at any Place, to the
Beauties, Elegancies, and Curiosities, which it affords. At Eshur, at Stowe, at
Wilton, at Eastbury, and at Prior's Park, Days are too short for the ravished
Imagination; while we admire the wondrous Power of Art in improving Nature. In
some of these, Art chiefly engages our Admiration; in others, Nature and Art
contend for our Applause; but in the last, the former seems to triumph. Here
Nature appears in her richest Attire, and A^dressed with the modestest
Simplicity, attends he^ benignant Mistress. Here Nature indeed pours forth the
choicest Treasures which she has lavished on this World; and here human Nature
presents you with an Object which can be only exceeded in the other.

The same Taste, the same Imagination, which luxuriously riots in these elegant
Scenes, can be amused with Objects of far inferior Note. The Woods, the Rivers,
the Lawns of Devon and of Dorset, attract the Eye of the ingenious Traveller,
anretard his Pace, which Delay he afterward compensates by swiftly scouring
over the gloomy Heath o^ Bagshot, or that pleasant Plain which extends itself
Westward from Stockbridge, where no other Object than one single Tree only in
sixteen Miles present itself to the View, unless the Clouds, in Compassion to
our tired Spirits, kindly open their variegated Mansions to our Prospect.

Not so travels the Money-meditating Tradesman the sagacious Justice, the
dignified Doctor, the warm clad Grazier, with all the numerous Offspring of
Wealth and Dullness. On they jogg, with equa^ Pace, through the verdant Meadows,
or over the barre^^ Heath, their Horses measuring four Miles and a hal^ per
Hour with the utmost Exactness; the Eyes of the Beast and of his Master being
alike directed forwards and employed in contemplating the same Objects i^ the
same manner. With equal Rapture the good Rider surveys the proudest Boasts of
the Architect, an those fair Buildings, with which some unknown Name has
adorned the rich Clothing Town; where heaps of Bricks are piled up as a Kind
of Monument, to show that Heaps of Money have been piled there before.

And now, Reader, as we are in Haste to attend our Heroine, we will leave to
thy Sagacity to apply all this to the Boeotian Writers, and to those Authors
who are their Opposites. This thou will be abundantly able to perform without
our Aid. Be^^ir thyself therefore on this Occasion; for though we will always
lend thee proper Assistance in difficult Places, as we do not, like some
others, expect thee to use the Arts of Divination to discover our Meaning: yet
we shall not indulge thy Laziness where nothing but thy own Attention is
required, for thou art highly mistaken if thou do imagine that we intended,
when we begun this great Work, to leave thy Sagacity nothing to do, or that
without sometimes exercising this Talent, thou will be able to travel through
our Pages with any Pleasure or Profit to thyself.

CHAP. X. Containing a Hint or two concerning Virtue, and a few more concerning
Suspicion.
OUR Company being arrived at London, were set down at his Lordship's House,
where while they refreshed themselves after the Fatigue of their ^ourney,
Servants were dispatched to provide a Lodging for the two Ladies; for as her
Ladyship was ^ot then in Town, Mrs. Fitzpatrick would by no ^leans consent to
accept a Bed in the Mansion of ^he Peer.

Some Readers will perhaps condemn this extraordinary Delicacy, as I may call
it, of Virtue, as too ^^ice and scrupulous; but we must make Allowances for her
Situation, which must be owned to have been very ticklish: and when we consider
the Malice of censorious Tongues, we must allow, if it was a Fault, the Fault
was an Excess on the right Side, and which every Woman who is in the self-same
Situation will do well to imitate. The most formal Appearance of Virtue, when
it is only an Appearance, may perhaps, in very abstracted Considerations, seem
to be rather less commendable than Virtue itself without this Formality; but it
will however be always more commended; and this, I believe, will be granted by
all, that it is necessary, unless in some very particular Cases, for every
Women to support either the one or the other.

A Lodging being prepared, Sophia accompanied her Cousin for that Evening; but
resolved early in the Morning to enquire after the Lady, into whose Protection,
as we have formerly mentioned, she had determined to throw herself, when she
quitted her Father's House. And this she was the more eager in doing, for some
Observations she had made during her Journey in the Coach.

Now as we could by no Means fix the odious Character of Suspicion on Sophia,
we are almost afraid to open to our Reader the Conceits which filled he Mind
concerning Mrs. Fitzpatrick; of whom she certainly entertained at present some
Doubts; which as they are very apt to enter into the Bosoms of the worst of
People, we think proper not to mention more plainly, till we have first
suggested a Word o^ two to our Reader touching Suspicion in general.

Of this there have always appeared to me to b^ two Degrees. The first of these
I choose to deriv^ from the Heart, as the extreme Velocity of its Discernment
seems to denote some previous inward Impulse, and the rather, as this
superlative Degre^ often forms its own Objects; sees what it is not and always
more than really exists. This is that quick-sighted Penetration, whose Hawk's
Eyes no Symptom of Evil can escape; which observes not only upon the Actions,
but upon the Words and Looks of Men; and as it proceeds from the Heart of the
Observer, so it dives into the Heart of the Observed, and there espies Evil, as
it were, in the first Embryo; nay sometimes before it can be said to be
conceived. An admirable Faculty, if it were infallible; but as this Degree of
Perfection is not even claimed by more than one mortal Being, so from the
Fallibility of such acute Discernment have arisen many sad Mischiefs and most
grievous Heart-akes to Innocence and Virtue. I cannot help therefore regarding
this vast Quicksightedness into Evil, as a vicious Excess, and a very
pernicious Evil in itself. And I am the more inclined to this Opinion, as I am
afraid it always proceeds from a Bad Heart, for the Reasons I have
abovementioned, and for one more, namely, because I never knew it the Property
of a good one. Now from this Degree of Suspicion I entirely and absolutely
acquit Sophia.

A second Degree of this Quality seems to arise from the Head. This is indeed
no other than the Faculty of seeing what is before your Eyes, and of drawing
Conclusions from what you see. The former of these is unavoidable by those who
have any Eyes, and the latter is perhaps no less certain and necessary a
Consequence of our having any Brains. This is altogether as bitter an Enemy to
Guilt, as the former is to Innocence, nor can I see it in an unamiable Light,
even though, through human Fallibility, it should be sometimes mistaken. For
Instance, if a Husband should accidentally surprise his Wife in the Lap or in
the Embraces of some of those pretty young Gentlemen who profess the Art of
Cuckoldom, I should not highly, I think, blame him for concluding more than
what he saw, from the Familiarities which he really had seen, and which we are
at least favorable enough to, when we call them innocent Freedoms. The Reader
will easily suggest great Plenty of Instances to himself; I shall add but one
more, which however unchristian it may be thought by some, I cannot help
esteeming to be strictly justifiable; and this is a Suspicion that a Man
iscapable of doing what he has done already, and tha^ it is possible for one
who has been a Villain once, to act the same Part again. And to confess the
Truth, of this Degree of Suspicion, I believe, Sophia was guilty. From this
Degree of Suspicion she had, in Fact, conceived an Opinion, that her Cousin was
really not better than she should be.

The Case it seems, was this: Mrs. Fitzpatrick wisely considered, that the
Virtue of a young Lady is, in the World, in the same Situation with a poor
Hare, which is certain, whenever it ventures abroad, to meet its Enemies: For
it can hardly meet any other. No sooner therefore was she determined to take
the first Opportunity of quitting the Protection of her Husband, than she
resolved to cast herself under the Protection of some other Man; and whom could
she so properly choose to be her Guardian as a Person of Quality, of Fortune, of
Honor; and who, besides a gallant Disposition which inclines Men to
Knight-Errantry; that is, to be the Champions of Ladies in Distress, had often
declared a violent Attachment to herself, and had already given her all the
Instances of it in his Power.

But as the Law has foolishly omitted this Office of Vice-Husband, or Guardian
to an eloped Lady and as Malice is apt to denominate him by a more disagreeable
Appellation; it was concluded that his Lordship should perform all such kind
Offices to the Lady in secret, and without publicly assuming the Character of
her Protector. Nay, to prevent any other Person from seeing him in this Light,
it was agreed that the Lady should proceed directly to Bath, and that his
Lordship should first go to London, and thence should go down to that Place by
the Advice of his Physicians.

Now all this Sophia very plainly understood, not from the Lips or Behavior of
Mrs. Fitzpatrick; but from the Peer, who was infinitely less expert at
retaining a Secret, than was the good Lady; and perhaps the exact Secrecy which
Mrs. Fitzpatrick had observed on this Head in her Narrative, served not a
little to heighten those Suspicions which were now risen in the Mind of her
Cousin.

Sophia very easily found out the Lady she sought, for indeed there was not a
Chairman in Town to whom her House was not perfectly well known; and as she
received, in Return of her first Message, a most pressing Invitation, she
immediately accepted it. Mrs. Fitzpatrick indeed did not desire her Cousin to
stay with her with more earnestness than Civility required. Whether she had
discerned and resented the Suspicion abovementioned, or from what other Motive
it arose, I cannot say; but certain it is, she was full as desirous of parting
with Sophia, as Sophia herself could be of going.

The young Lady, when she came to take Leave of her Cousin, could not avoid
giving her a short Hint of Advice. She begged her, for Heaven's Sake, to take
Care of herself, and to consider in how dangerous a Situation she stood;
adding, she hoped some Method would be found of reconciling her to her Husband.
'You must remember, my Dear, says she, the Maxim which my Aunt Western has so
often repeated to us both; That whenever the Matrimonial Alliance is broke, and
War declared between Husband and Wife, she can hardly make a disadvantageous
Peace for herself on any Conditions. These are my Aunt's very Words, and she
has had a great deal of Experience in the World.' Mrs. Fitzpatrick answered,
with a contemptuous Smile, 'Never fear me, Child, take Care of yourself; for
you are younger than me. I will come and visit you in a few Days; but, dear
Sophy, let me give you one Piece of Advice: Leave the Character of Graveairs in
the Country; for, believe me it will sit very aukwardly upon you in this Town.'

Thus the two Cousins parted, and Sophia repaired directly to Lady Bellaston,
where she found a most hearty, as well as most polite Welcome. The Lady had
taken a great Fancy to her when she had seen her formerly with her Aunt
Western. She was indeed extremely glad to see her, and was no sooner acquainted
with the Reasons which induced her to leave the Squire and fly to London, than
she highly applauded her Sense and Resolution; and after expressing the highest
Satisfaction in the Opinion which Sophia had declared she entertained of her
Ladyship, by choosing her House for an Asylum, she promised her all the
Protection which it was in her Power to give.

As we have now brought Sophia into safe Hands, the Reader will, I apprehend,
be contented to deposite her there a while, and to look a little after other
Personages, and particularly poor Jones, whom we have left long enough to do
Penance for his past Offenses, which, as is the Nature of Vice, brought
sufficient Punishment upon him themselves.

THE HISTORY OF A FOUNDLING.
BOOK XII. Containing the same individual Time with the former.
CHAP. I. Showing what is to be deemed Plagiarism in a modern Author, and what
is to be considered as lawful Prize.
THE learned Reader must have observed, that in the Course of this mighty Work,
I have often translated Passages out of the best ancient Authors, without
quoting the Original, or without taking the least Notice of the Book from
whence they were borrowed.

This Conduct in Writing is placed in a proper Light by the ingenious Abbe
Bannier, in his Preface to his Mythology, a Work of great Erudition, and of
equal Judgment. 'It will be easy,' says he, 'for the Reader to observe, that I
have frequently had greater Regard to him, than to my own Reputation: For an
Author certainly pays him a considerable Compliment, when, for his Sake, he
suppresses learned Quotations that come in his Way, and which would have cost
him but the bare Trouble of translating.'

To fill up a Work with these Scraps may indeed be considered as a downright
Cheat on the learned World, who are by such Means imposed upon to buy a second
Time in Fragments and by Retail what they have already in Gross, if not in
their Memories, upon their Shelves; and it is still more cruel upon the
Illiterate, who are drawn in to pay for what is of no manner of Use to them. A
Writer who intermixes great Quaintity of Greek and Latin with his Works, deals
by the Ladies and fine Gentlemen in the same paultry Manner with which they are
treated by the Auctioneers, who often endeavor so to confound and mix up their
Lots, that, in order to purchase the Commodity you want, you are obliged at the
same Time to purchase that which will do you no Service.

And yet as there is no Conduct so fair and disinterested, but that it may be
misunderstood by Ignorance, and misrepresented by Malice, I have been sometimes
tempted to preserve my own Reputation, at the Expense of my Reader, and to
transcribe the Original, or at least to quote Chapter and Verse, whenever I
have made Use either of the Thought or Expression of another. I am indeed in
some Doubt that I have often suffered by that contrary Method; and that by
suppressing the original Author's Name, I have been rather suspected of
Plagiarism, than reputed to act from the amiable Motive above-assigned by that
justly celebrated Frenchman.

Now to obviate all such Imputations for the future, I do here confess and
justify the Fact. The Ancients may be considered as a rich Common, where every
Person who has the smallest Tenement in Parnassus has a free Right to fatten
his Muse. Or, to place it in a clearer Light, we Moderns are to the Ancients
what the Poor are to the Rich. By the Poor here I mean, that large and
venerable Body which, in English, we call The Mob. Now, whoever has had the
Honor to be admitted to any Degree of Intimacy with this Mob, must well know
that it is one of their established Maxims, to plunder and pillage their rich
Neighbors without any Reluctance; and that this is held to be neither Sin nor
Shame among them. And so constantly do they abide and act by this Maxim, that
in every Parish almost in the Kingdom, there is a Kind of Confederacy ever
carrying on against a certain Person of Opulence called the Squire, whose
Property is considered as Free-Booty by all his poor Neighbors; who, as they
conclude that there is no Manner of Guilt in such Depredations, look upon it is
a Point of Honor and moral Obligation to conceal, and to preserve each other
from Punishment on all such Occasions.

In like Manner are the Ancients, such as Homer, Virgil, Horace, Cicero, and
the rest, to be esteemed among us Writers, as so many wealthy Squires, from
whom we, the Poor of Parnassus, claim an immemorial Custom of taking whatever
we can come at. This Liberty I demand, and this I am as ready to allow again to
my poor Neighbors in their Turn. All profess, and all I require from my
Brethren, is to maintain the same strict Honesty among ourselves, which the Mob
show to one another. To steal from one another, is indeed highly criminal and
indecent; for this may be strictly styled defrauding the Poor sometimes perhaps
those who are poorer than ourselves) or to see it under the most opprobrious
Colors, robbing the Spittal.

Since therefore upon the strictest Examination, my own Conscience cannot lay
any such pitiful Theft to my Charge, I am contented to plead guilty to the
former Accusation; nor shall I ever scruple to take to my self any Passage
which I shall find in an ancient Author to my Purpose, without setting down the
Name of the Author from whence it was taken. Nay, I absolutely claim a Property
in all such Sentiments the Moment they are transcribed into my Writings, and I
expect all Readers henceforward to regard them as purely and entirely my own.
This Claim however I desire to be allowed me only on Condition, that I preserve
strict Honesty toward my poor Brethren, from whom if ever I borrow any of that
little of which they are possessed, I shall never fail to put their Mark upon
it, that it may be at all Times ready to be restored to the right Owner.

The Omission of this was highly blameable in one Mr. Moore, who having
formerly borrowed some Lines of Pope and Company, took the Liberty to
transcribe six of them into his Play of the Rival Modes. Mr. Pope however very
luckily found them in the said Play, and laying violent Hands on his own
Property, transferred it back again into his own Works; and for a further
Punishment, imprisoned the said Moore in the loathsome Dungeon of the Dunciad,
where his unhappy Memory now remains, and eternally will remain, as a proper
Punishment for such his unjust Dealings in the poetical Trade.

CHAP. II. In which, though the Squire does not find his Daughter, something is
found which puts an End to his Pursuit.
THE History now returns to the Inn at Upton, whence we shall first trace the
Footsteps of Squire Western; for as he will soon arrive at an End of his
Journey, we shall have then full Leisure to attend our Hero.

The Reader may be pleased to remember, that the said Squire departed from the
Inn in great Fury, and in that Fury he pursued his Daughter. The Hostler having
informed him that she had crossed the Severn, he likewise past that River with
his Equipage, and rode full Speed, vowing the utmost Vengeance against poor
Sophia, if he should but overtake her.

He had not gone far, before he arrived at a Crossway. Here he called a short
Council of War, in which, after hearing different Opinions, he at last gave the
Direction of his Pursuit to Fortune, and struck directly into the Worcester
Road.

In this Road he proceeded about two Miles, when he began to bemoan himself
most bitterly, frequently crying out, 'What Pity is it! Sure never was so
unlucky a Dog as myself! and then burst forth a Volley of Oaths and
Execrations.'

The Parson attempted to administer Comfort to him on this Occasion. 'Sorrow
not, Sir,' says he, like those without Hope. Howbeit we have not yet been able
to overtake young Madam, we may account it some good Fortune, that we have
hitherto traced her Course aright. Peradventure she will soon be fatigated with
her Journey, and will tarry in some Inn, in order to renovate her corporeal
Functions; and in that Case, in all moral Certainty, you will very briefly be
compos voti.'

'Pogh! D -- n the Slut,' answered the Squire, I am lamenting the Loss of so
fine a Morning for Hunting. It is confounded hard to lose one of the best
Scenting Days, in all Appearance, which has been this Season, and especially
after so long a Frost.'

Whether Fortune, who now and then shows some Compassion in her wantonest
Tricks, might not take Pity of the Squire; and as she had detirmined not to let
him overtake his Daughter, might not resolve to make him Amends some other Way,
I will not assert; but he had hardly uttered the Words just before
commemorated, and two or three Oaths at their Heels, when a Pack of Hounds
began to open their melodious Throats at a small Distance from them, which the
Squire's Horse and his Rider both perceiving, both immediately pricked up their
Ears, and the Squire crying, 'She's gone, she is gone!' Damn me 'if she is not
gone!' instantly clapped Spurs to the Beast, who little needed it, having
indeed the same Inclination with his Master; and now the whole Company crosing
into a Corn field, rode directly toward the Hounds, with much Hollowing and
Hooping, while the poor Parson, blessing himself, brought up the Rear.

Thus Fable reports, that the fair Grimalkin, whom Venus, at the Desire of a
passionate Lover, converted from a Cat into a fine Woman, no sooner perceived a
Mouse, than mindful of her former Sport, and still retaining her pristine
Nature, she lept from the Bed of her Husband to pursue the little Animal.

What are we to understand by this? Not that the Bride was displeased with the
Embraces of her amorous Bridegroom: For though some have remarked that Cats are
subject to Ingratitude, yet Women and Cats too will be pleased and purr on
certain Occasions. The Truth is, as the sagacious Sir Roger L'Estrange
observes, in his deep Reflections, that 'if we shut Nature out at the Door, she
will come in at the Window; and that Puss, though a Madam, will be a Mouser
still.' In the same Manner we are not to arraign the Squire of any Want of Love
for his Daughter: For in reality he had a great deal; we are only to consider
that he was a Squire and a Sportsman, and then we may apply the Fable to him,
and the judicious Reflections likewise.

The Hounds ran very hard, as it is called, and the Squire pursued over Hedge
and Ditch, with all his usual Vociferation and Alacrity, and with all his usual
Pleasure; nor did the Thoughts of Sophia ever once intrude themselves to allay
the Satisfaction he enjoyed in the Chase, which, he said, was one of the finest
he ever saw, and which he swore was very well worth going fifty Miles for. As
the Squire forgot his Daughter, the Servants, we may easily believe, forgot
their Mistress; and the Parson, after having expressed much Astonishment in
Latin to himself, at length likewise abandoned all farther Thoughts of the
young Lady, and jogging on at a Distance behind, began to meditate a Portion of
Doctrine for the ensuing Sunday.

The Squire who owned the Hounds was highly pleased with the Arrival of his
Brother Squire and Sportsman: For all Men approve Merit in their own Way, and
no Man was more expert in the Field than Mr. Western, nor did any other better
know how to encourage the Dogs with his Voice, and to animate the Hunt with his
Holla.

Sportsmen, in the Warmth of a Chase, are too much engaged to attend to any
Manner of Ceremony; nay, even to the Office of Humanity: For if any of them
meet with an Accident by tumbling into a Ditch, or into a River, the rest pass
on regardless, and generally leave him to his Fate; during this Time,
therefore, the two Squires, though often close to each other, interchanged not a
single Word. The Master of the Hunt, however, often saw and approved the great
Judgment of the Stranger in drawing the Dogs when they were at a Fault, and
hence conceived a very high Opinion of his Understanding, as the Number of his
Attendants inspired no small Reverence to his Quality. As soon therefore as the
Sport was ended by the Death of the little Animal which had occasioned it, the
two Squires met, and in all Squire-like Greeting, saluted each other.

The Conversation was entertaining enough, and what we may perhaps relate in an
Appendix, or on some other Occasion; but as it nowise concerns this History, we
cannot prevail on ourselves to give it a Place here. It concluded with a second
Chase, and that with an Invitation to Dinner. This being accepted, was followed
by a hearty Bout of Drinking, which ended in as hearty a Nap on the Part of
Squire Western.

Our Squire was by no Means a Match either for his Host, or for Parson Supple,
at his Cups that Evening; for which the violent Fatigue of Mind as well as Body
that he had undergone, may very well account, without the least Derogation from
his Honor. He was indeed, according to the vulgar Phrase, whistled drunk; for
before he had swallowed the third Bottle, he became so entirely overpowered,
that though he was not carried off to Bed till long after, the Parson considered
him as absent, and having acquainted the other Squire with all relating to
Sophia, he obtained his Promise of seconding those Arguments which he intended
to urge the next Morning for Mr. Western's Return.

No sooner therefore had the good Squire shaken off his Evening, and began to
call for his Morning Draught, and to summon his Horses in order to renew his
Pursuit, than Mr. Supple began his Dissuasives; which the Host so strongly
seconded, that they at length prevailed, and Mr. Western agreed to return home;
being principally moved by one Argument, viz. That he knew not which Way to go,
and might probably be riding farther from his Daughter instead of toward her.
He then took Leave of his Brother Sportsman, and expressing great Joy that the
Frost was broken (which might perhaps be no small Motive to his hastening home)
set forwards, or rather backwards, for Somersetshire; but not before he
dispatched Part of his Retinue in quest of his Daughter, after whom he likewise
sent a Volley of the most bitter Execrations which he could invent.

CHAP. III. The Departure of Jones from Upton, with what past between him and
Partridge on the Road.
AT length we are once more come to our Hero; and to say Truth, we have been
obliged to part with him so long, that considering the Condition in which we
left him, I apprehend many of our Readers have concluded we intended to abandon
him for ever; he being at present in that Situation in which prudent People
usually desist from enquiring any farther after their Friends, lest they should
be shocked by hearing such Friends had hanged themselves.

But, in reality, if we have not all the Virtues, I will boldly say, neither
have we all the Vices of a prudent Character; and though it is not easy to
conceive Circumstances much more miserable than those of poor Jones at present,
we shall return to him, and attend upon him with the same Diligence as if he
was wantoning in the brightest Beams (...) Fortune.

Mr. Jones then, and his Companion Partridge, left the Inn a few Minutes after
the Departure of Squire Western, and pursued the same Road on Foot; for the
Ostler told them, that no Horses were by any Means to be at that Time procured
at Upton. On they marched with heavy Hearts; for though their Disquiet proceeded
from very different Reasons, yet displeased they were both; and if Jones sighed
bitterly, Partridge grunted altogether as sadly every Step.

When they came to the Cross-roads where the Squire had stopped to take Council,
Jones stopped likewise, and turning to Partridge, asked his Opinion which Track
they should pursue. Ah, Sir!' answered Partridge, I wish your Honor would
follow my Advice.' 'Why should I not?' replied Jones; for it is now indifferent
to me whither I go, or what becomes of me? 'My Advice then, said Partridge, is
that you immediately face about and return home: For who that had such a Home
to return to, as your Honor, would travel thus about the Country like a'
Vagabond? I ask Pardon, sed vox easola reperta est.'

'Alas! cries Jones, I have no Home to return to; -- but if my Friend, my
Father would receive me, could I bear the Country from which Sophia is flown --
Cruel Sophia! Cruel! No. Let me blame myself -- No, let me blame thee. D --
nation seize thee, Fool, Blockhead! thou have undone me,' and I will tear thy
Soul from thy Body -- At which Words he laid violent Hands on the Collar of
poor Partridge, and shook him more heartily than an Ague Fit, or his own Fears
had ever done before.

Partridge fell trembling on his Knees, and begged for Mercy, vowing he had
meant no Harm -- when Jones, after staring wildly on him for a Moment, quitted
his Hold; and discharged a Rage on himself, that had it fallen on the other,
would certainly have put an End to his ^eing, which indeed the very
Apprehension of it had almost effected.

We would bestow some Pains here in minutely describing all the mad Pranks
which Jones played on this Occasion, could we be well assured that the Reader
would take the same Pains in perusing them; but as we are appprehensive that
after all the Labor which we should employ in painting this Scene, the said
Reader would be very apt to skip it entirely over, we have saved ourselves that
Trouble. To say the Truth, we have, from this Reason alone, often done great
Violence to the Luxuriance of our Genius, and have left many excellent
Descriptions out of our Work, which would otherwise have been in it. And this
Suspicion, to be honest, arises, as is generally the Case, from our own wicked
Heart; for we have, ourselves, been very often most horridly given to jumping,
as we have run through the Pages of voluminous Historians.

Suffice it then simply to say, that Jones, after having played the Part of a
Madam for many Minutes, came, by Degrees, to himself; which no sooner happened,
than turning to Partridge, he very earnestly begged his Pardon for the Attack
he had made on him in the Violence of his Passion; but concluded, by desiring
him never to mention his Return again; for he was resolved never to see that
Country any more.

Partridge easily forgave, and faithfully promised to obey the Injunction now
laid upon him. And then Jones very briskly cried out: 'Since it is absolutely
impossible for me to pursue any farther the Steps of my Angel -- I will pursue
those of Glory. Come on, my brave Lad, now for the Army: -- It is a glorious
Cause, and I would willingly sacrifice my Life in it, even though it was worth my
preserving.' And so saying, he immediately struck into the different Road from
that which the Squire had taken, and, by mere Chance, pursued the very same
through which Sophia had before passed.

Our Travelers now marched a full Mile, without speaking a Syllable to each
other, though Jones, indeed, muttered many things to himself; as to Partridge, he
was profoundly silent: For he was not, perhaps, perfectly recovered from his
former Fright; besides, he had Apprehensions of provoking his Friend to a
second Fit of Wrath; especially as he now began to entertain a Conceit, which
may not, perhaps, create any great Wonder in the Reader. In short, he began now
to suspect that Jones was absolutely out of his Senses.

At length Jones being weary of Soliloquy, addressed himself to his Companion,
and blamed him for his Taciturnity: For which the poor Man very honestly
accounted, from his Fear of giving Offense. And now this Fear being pretty well
removed, by the most absolute Promises of Indemnity, Partradge again took the
Bridle from his Tongue; which perheps, rejoiced no less at regaining its
Liberty, than a young Colt, when the Bridle is slipped from his Neck, and he is
turned loose into the Pastures.

As Partridge was inhibited from that Topic which would have first suggested
itself, he fell upon that which was next uppermost in his Mind, namely, the Man
of the Hill. 'Certainly, Sir, says he, that could never be a Man, who dresses
himself, and lives after such a strange Manner, and so unlike other Folks.
Besides his Diet, as the old Woman told me, is chiefly upon Herbs, which is a
fitter Food for a Horse than a Christian: Nay, Landlord at Upton says, that the
Neighbors thereabouts have very fearful Notions about him. It runs strangely
in my Head, that it must have been some Spirit, who, perhaps, might be sent to
forewarn us: And who knows, but all that Matter which he told us, of his going
to Fight, and of his being taken Prisoner, and of the great Danger he was in of
being hanged, might be intended as a Warning to us, considering what we are
going about: Besides, I dreamt of nothing all last Night, but of Fighting; and
methought the Blood ran out of my Nose, as Liquor out of a Tap. Indeed, Sir,
infandum, Regina, jubes renovare dolorem.'

'Thy Story, Partridge' answered Jones, is almost as ill applied as thy Latin.
Nothing can be more likely to happen than Death, to Men who go into Battle.
Perhaps we shall both fall in it, -- and what then?' 'What then!' replied
Partridge; Why then there is an End of us, is there not? When I am gone all is
over with me. What matters the Cause to me, or who gets the Victory, if I am
killed? I shall never enjoy any Advantage from it. What are all the ringing of
Bells, and Bonfires, to one that is six Foot under Ground? There will be an End
of poor Partridge. And an End of poor Partridge, cries Jones, there must be one
Time or other. If you love Latin, I will repeat you some fine Lines out of
Horace, which' would Inspire Courage into a Coward.

Dulce and decorum est pro Patria mori.
Mors and fugacem persequitur virum
Nec parcit imbellis juventae
Popliti^us, timidoque tergo.
'I wish you would construe them,' cries Partride, 'for Horace is a hard
Author; and I cannot understand as you repeat them.'

'I will repeat you a bad Imitation, or rather Paraphrase of my own, said
Jones; for I am but an' indifferent Poet.'

'Who would not die in his dear Country's Cause?
'Since if base Fear his dastard Step withdraws,
'From Death he cannot fly: -- One common Grave
'Receives, at last, the Coward and the Brave.'
'That's very certain, cries Partridge. Ay, sure, Mors omnibus communis: But
there is a great Difference between dying in ones Bed a great many Years hence,
like a good Christian, with all our Friends crying about us; and being shot
Today or Tomorrow, like a Mad-dog; or perhaps, hacked in twenty Pieces with a
Sword, and that too, before we have repented of all our Sins. O Lord have Mercy
upon us! To be sure, the Soldiers are a wicked Kind of People. I never loved to
have any Thing to do with them. I never could bring myself hardly to look upon
them as Christians. There is nothing but Cursing and Swearing among them. I
wish your Honor would repent: I heartily wish you would repent, before it is
too late; and not think of going among them. -- Evil Communication corrupts
good Manners. That is my principal Reason. For as for that Matter I am no more
afraid than another Man, not I; as to Matter of that. I know all human Flesh
must die; but yet a Man may live many Years for all that. Why I am a
middle-aged Man now, and yet I may live a great Number of Years. I have read of
several who have lived to be above a hundred, and some a great deal above a
hundred. Not that I hope, I mean that I promise myself, to live to any such Age
as that neither -- But if it be only to eighty or ninety; Heaven be praised
that is a great Ways off yet; and I am not afraid of dying then, no more than
another Man: But, surely, to tempt Death before a Man's Time is come, seems to
me downright Wickedness and Presumption. Besides, if it was to do any good
indeed; but let the Cause be what it will, what mighty Matter of Good can two
People do? And, for my Part, I understand nothing of it. I never fired off a
Gun above ten Times in my Life; and then it was not charged with Bullets. And
for the Sword, I never learned to fence, and know nothing of the Matter. And
then there are those Cannons, which certainly it must be thought the highest
Presumption to go in the Way of; and nobody but a Madman -- I ask Pardon; upon
my Soul, I meant no Harm: I beg I may not throw your Honor into another
Passion.'

'Be under no Apprehension, Partridge,' cries Jones, I am now so well convinced
of thy Cowardice, that thou could not provoke me on any Account. Your Honor,
answered he, may call me Coward or any Thing else you please. If loving to
Sleep in a whole Skin makes a Man a Coward, non immunes ab illis malis sumus. I
never read in my Grammar, that a Man cannot be a good Man without fighting. Vir
bonus est quis? Qui consulta Patrum, qui leges juraque servat. Not a Word of
Fighting; and I am sure the Scripture is so much against it, that a Man shall
never persuade me he is a good Christian while he sheds Christian-blood.'

CHAP. IV. The Adventure of a Beggar-Man.
JUST as Partridge had uttered that good and pious Doctrine, with which the
last Chapter concluded, they arrived at another Cross-way, when a lame Fellow
in Rags, asked them for Alms; upon which Partridge gave him a severe Rebuke,
saying, 'Every Parish ought to keep their own Poor.' Jones then fell a
laughing, and asked Partridge, if he was not ashamed with so much Charity in
his Mouth to have no Charity in his Heart. 'Your Religion, says he, serves you
only for an Excuse for your Faults, but is no Incentive to your Virtue. Can any
Man who is really a Christian abstain from relieving one of his Brethren in
such a miserable Condition?' and at the same time putting his Hand in his
Pocket, he gave the poor Object a Shilling.

'Master,' cries the fellow, after thanking him, 'I have a curious Thing here
in my Pocket, which I found about two Miles off, if your Worship will please to
buy it. I should not venture to pull it out to every one; but as you are so
good a Gentleman, and so kind to the Poor, you will not suspect a Man of being a
Thief only because he is poor.' He then pulled out a little gilt Pocketbook,
and delivered it into the Hands of Jones.

Jones presently opened it, and (guess, Reader, what he felt,) saw in the first
Page the Words Sophia Western, written by her own fair Hand. He no sooner read
the Name, than he pressed it close to his Lips; nor could he avoid falling into
some very frantic Raptures, notwitstanding his Company; but, perhaps, these
very Raptures made him forget he was not alone.

While Jones was kissing and mumbling the Book, as if he had an Excellent brown
buttered Crust in his Mouth, or as if he had been really a Bookworm, or an
Author, who has nothing to eat but his own Works, a Piece of Paper fell from
its Leaves to the Ground, which Partridge took up, and delivered to Jones, who
presently perceived it to be a Bank-bill. It was, indeed, the very Bill which
Western had given his Daughter, the Night before her Departure; and a Jew would
have jumped to purchase it at five Shilllngs less than 100l.

The Eyes of Partridge sparkled at this News, which Jones now proclaimed aloud;
and so did (though with somewhat a different Aspect) those of the poor Fellow who
had found the Book; and who (I hope from a Principle of Honesty) had never
opened it: But we should not deal honestly by the Reader, if we omitted to
inform him of a Circumstance, which may be here a little material, viz. That
the Fellow could not read.

Jones, who had felt nothing but pure Joy and Transport from the finding the
Book, was affected with a Mixture of Concern at this new Discovery: For his
Imagination instantly suggested to him, that the Owner of the Bill might
possibly want it, before he could be able to convey it to her. He then
acquainted the Finder, that he knew the Lady to whom the Book belonged, and
would endeavor to find her out as soon as possible, and return it her.

The Pocketbook was a late Present from Mrs. Western to her Neice: It had cost
five and twenty Shillings, having been bought of a celebrated Toyman, but the
real Value of the Silver, which it contained in its clasp, was about 18d. and
that Price the said Toyman, as it was altogether as good as when it first
issued from his Shop, would now have given for it. A prudent Person would,
however, have taken proper Advantage of the Ignorance of this Fellow, and would
not have offered more than a Shilling, or perhaps Sixpence for it; nay, some
perhaps would have given nothing, and left the Fellow to his Action of Trover,
which some learned Sergeants may doubt whether he could, under these
Circumstances, have maintained.

Jones, on the contrary, whose Character was on the outside of Generosity, and
may perhaps not very unjustly have been suspected of Extravagance, without any
Hesitation, gave a Guinea in Exchange for the Book. The poor man, who had not
for a long Time before, been possessed of so much Treasure, gave Mr. Jones a
thousand Thanks, and discovered little less of Transport in his Muscles, than
Jones had before shown, when he had first read the Name of Sophia Western.

The Fellow very readily agreed to attend our Travelers to the Place where he
had found the Pocketbook. Together, therefore, they proceeded directly
thither; but not so fast as Mr. Jones desired; for his Guide unfortunately
happened to be lame, and could not possibly travel faster than a Mile an Hour.
As this Place, therefore, was at above three Miles Distance, though the Fellow
had said otherwise, the Reader need not be acquainted how long they were in
walking it.

Jones opened the Book a hundred Times during their Walk, kissed it as often,
talked much to himself, and very little to his Companions. At all which the
Guide expressed some Signs of Astonishment to Partridge; who more than once shook
his Head, and cried, poor Gentleman! orandum est ut sit men's sana in corpore
sano

At length, they arrived at the very Spot, where Sophia unhappily dropped the
Pocketbook, and where the Fellow had as happily found it. Here Jones offered
to take Leave of his Guide, and to improve his Pace; but the Fellow, in whom
that violent Surprise and Joy which the first Receipt of the Guinea had
occasioned, was now considerably abated, and who had now had sufficient Time to
recollect himself, put on a discontented Look, and, scratching his Head, said,
'He hoped his Worship would give him something more. Your Worship,' said he,
'will, I hope, take it into your Consideration, that if I had not been honest I
might have kept the Whole.' And, indeed, this the Reader must confess to have
been true. 'If the Paper there, said he, be worth 100l. I am sure the finding
it deserves more than a Guinea. Besides, suppose your Worship should never see
the Lady, nor give it her -- and though your Worship looks and talks very much
like a Gentleman, yet I have only your Worship's bare Word: And, certainly, if
the right Owner ben't to be found, it all belongs to the first Finder. I hope
your Worship will consider all these Matters. I am but a poor Man, and
therefore don't desire to have all; but it is but reasonable I should have my
Share.'

'Your Worship looks like a good Man, and I hope, will consider my Honesty: For
I might have kept every Farthing, and no Body ever the wiser.' I promise thee,
upon my Honor,' cries Jones, that I know the right Owner, and will restore it
her.' Nay, your Worship,' answered the Fellow, 'may do as you please as to
that, if you will but give me my Share, that is one half of the Money, your
Honor may keep the rest yourself if you please;' and concluded with swearing
by a very vehement Oath, 'that he would never mention a Syllable of it to any
Man living.'

'Lookee, Friend, cries Jones, the right Owner shall certainly have again all
that she lost; and as for any further Gratuity, I really cannot give it you at
present; but let me know your Name, and where you live, and it is more than
possible, you may hereafter have further Reason to rejoice at this Morning's
Adventure.'

'I don't know what you mean by Venture,' cries the Fellow; it seems, I must
venture whether you will return the Lady her Money or no: But I hope your
Worship will consider -- Come, come, said Partridge, tell his Honor your Name,
and where you may be found; I warrant you will never repent having put the
Money into his Hands.' The Fellow seeing no Hopes of recovering the Possession
of the Pocketbook, at last complied in giving in his Name and Place of Abode,
which Jones writ upon a Piece of Paper with the Pencil of Sophia; and then
placing the Paper in the same Page where she had writ her Name, he cried out:
'There, Friend, you are the happiest Man alive, I have joined your Name to that
of an Angel.' 'I don't know any Thing about Angels,' answered the Fellow; 'but
I wish you would give me a little more Money, or else return me the
Pocketbook.' Partridge now waxed wroth; he called the poor Cripple by several
vile and opprobrious Names, and was absolutely proceeding to beat him, but
Jones would not suffer any such Thing: And now telling the Fellow he would
certainly find some Opportunity of serving him, Mr. Jones departed as fast as
his Heels would carry him; and Partridge, into whom the Thoughts of the hundred
Pound had infused new Spirits, followed his Leader; while the Man who was
obliged to stay behind, fell to cursing them both, as well as his Parents; 'For
had they, says he, sent me to Charity School to learn to write and read and
cast Account, I should have known the Value of these Matters as well as other
People.'

CHAP. V. Containing more Adventures which Mr. Jones and his Companion met on
the Road.
OUR Travelers now walked so fast, that they had very little Time or Breath
for Conversation; Jones meditating all the Way on Sophia, and Partridge on the
Bank-Bill, which though it gave him some Pleasure, caused him at the same Time
to repine at Fortune, which, in all his Walks, had never given him such an
Opportunity of showing his Honesty, They had proceeded above three Miles, when
Partridge being unable any longer to keep up with Jones, called to him, and
begged him a little to slacken his Pace; with this he was the more ready to
comply, as he had for some Time lost the Footsteps of the Horses, which the
Thaw had enabled him to trace during several Miles, and he was now upon a wide
Common where were several Roads.

He here therefore stopped to consider which of these Roads he should pursue,
when on a sudden they heard the Noise of a Drum that seemed at no great
Distance. This Sound presently alarmed the Fears of Partridge, and he cried
out, 'Lord have Mercy upon us all; 'they are certainly a coming!' 'Who is
coming?' cries Jones, for Fear had long since given Place to softer Ideas in
his Mind, and since his Adventure with the lame Man, he had been totally intent
on pursuing Sophia, without entertaining one Thought of an Enemy. 'Who?' cries
Partridge, 'why the Rebels; but why should I call them Rebels, they may be very
honest Gentlemen, for any thing I know to the contrary. The Devil take him that
affronts them, I say. I am sure, if they have nothing to say to me, I will have
nothing to say to them but in a civil Way. For Heaven's Sake, Sir, don't
affront them if they should come, and perhaps they may do us no Harm; but would
it not be the wiser Way to creep into some of yonder Bushes till they are gone
by? What can two unarmed Men do perhaps against fifty thousand? Certainly
nobody but a Madman; I hope your Honor is not offended: but certainly no Man
who has Men's sana in Corpore sano' -- Here Jones interrupted this Torrent of
Eloquence, which Fear had inspired, saying, 'That by the Drum he perceived they
were near some Town.' He then made directly toward the Place whence the Noise
proceeded, bidding Partridge 'take Courage, for that he would lead him into no
Danger; and adding, it was impossible the Rebels should be so near.'

Partridge was a little comforted with this last Assurance; and though he would
more gladly have gone the contrary Way, he followed his Leader, his Heart
beating Time, but not after the Manner of Heroes, to the Music of the Drum,
which ceased not till they had traversed the Common, and were come into a
narrow Lane.

And now Partridge, who kept even Pace with Jones, discovered something painted
flying in the Air, very few Yards before him, which fancying to be the Colors
of the Enemy, he fell a bellowing, 'O Lord Sir, here they are, there is the
Crown and Coffin. Oh Lord! I never saw any Thing so terrible; and we are within
Gun shot of them already.'

Jones no sooner looked up than he plainly perceived what it was which
Partridge had thus mistaken. Partridge,' says he, 'I fancy you will be able to
engage this whole Army yourself; for by the Colors I guess what the Drum was
which we heard before, and which beats up for Recruits to a Puppet-show.

'A Puppet-show!' answered Partridge, with most ^^ger Transport. 'And is it
really no more than that? I love a Puppet-show of all the Pastimes upon Earth.
Do, good Sir, let us tarry and see it. Besides I am quite famished to Death;
for it is now almost dark, and I have not eat a Morsel since three o'Clock in
the Morning.'

They now arrived at an Inn, or indeed an Alehouse, where Jones was prevailed
upon to stop, the rather as he had no longer any Assurance of being in the Road
he desired. They walked both directly into the Kitchen, where Jones began to
enquire if no Ladies had passed that Way in the Morning, and Partridge as
eagerly examined into the State of their Provisions; and indeed his Enquiry met
with the better Success; for Jones could not hear News of Sophia; but
Partridge, to his great Satisfaction, found good Reason to expect very shortly
the agreeable Sight of an excellent smoking Dish of Eggs and Bacon.

In strong and healthy Constitutions Love has a very different Effect from
what it causes in the puny Part of the Species. In the latter it generally
destroys all that Appetite which tends toward the Conservation of the
Individual; but in the former, though it often induces Forgetfulness, and a
Neglect of Food, as well as of every thing else, yet place a good Piece o^
well-powered Buttock before a hungry Lover, and he seldom fails very handsomely
to play his Part. Thus it happened in the present Case; for though Jones perhaps
wanted a Prompter, and might have traveled much farther, had he been alone,
with an empty Stomach, yet no sooner did he sit down to the Bacon and Eggs,
than he fell to as heartily and voraciously a^ Partridge himself.

Before our Travelers had finished their Dinner Night came on, and as the Moon
was now past the full it was extremely dark. Partridge therefore prevail on
Jones to stay and see the Puppet-show, which wa^ just going to begin, and to
which they were very eagerly invited by the Master of the said Show, who
declared that his Figures were the finest which the World had ever produced,
and that they had given great Satisfaction to all the Quality in every Town in
England.

The Puppet-show was performed with great Regularity and Decency. It was called
the fine and serious Part of the Provoked Husband; and it was indeed a very
grave and solemn Entertainment, without any low Wit or Humor, or Jests; or, to
do it no more than Justice, without any thing which could provoke a Laugh. The
Audience were all highly pleased. A grave Matron told the Master she would
bring her two Daughters the next Night, as he did not show any Stuff; and an
Attorney's Clerk, and an Exciseman, both declared, that the Characters of Lord
and Lady Townly were well preserved, and highly in Nature. Partridge likewise
concurred with this Opinion.

The Master was so highly elated with these Encomiums, that he could not
refrain from adding some more of his own. He said, 'The present Age was not
improved in any Thing so much as in their Puppet-shows; which, by throwing out
Punch and his Wife Joan, and such idle Trumpery, were at last brought to be a
rational Entertainment. I remember,' said he, 'when I first took to the
Business, there was a great deal of low Stuff that did very well to make Folks
laugh; but was never calculated to improve the Morals of young People, which
certainly ought to be principally aimed at in every Puppet-show: For why may
not good and instructive Lessons be conveyed this Way, as well as any other? My
Figures are as big as the Life, and they represent the Life in every
particular; and I question not but People rise from my little Drama as much
improved as they do from the great. I would by no Means degrade the Ingenuity
of your Profession, answered Jones; but I should have been glad to have seen my
old Acquaintance Master Punch for all that; and so far from improving, I think,
by leaving out him and his merry Wife Joan, you have spoiled your Puppet-show.'

The Dancer of Wires conceived an immediate and high Contempt for Jones, from
these Words. And with much Disdain in his Countenance, he replied, 'Very
probably, Sir, that may be your Opinion; but I have the Satisfaction to know
the best Judges differ from you, and it is impossible to please every Taste. I
confess, indeed, some of the Quality at Bath, two or three Years ago, wanted
mightily to bring Punch again upon the Stage. I believe I lost some Money for
not agreeing to it; but let others do as they will, a little Matter shall never
bribe me to degrade my own Profession, nor will I ever willingly consent to the
spoiling the Decency and Regularity of my Stage, by introducing any such low
Stuff upon it.'

'Right, Friend, cries the Clerk, you are very right. Always avoid what is low.
There are several of my Acquaintance in London, who are resolved to drive every
Thing which is low from the Stage.' 'Nothing can be more proper,' cries the
Exciseman, pulling his Pipe from his Mouth. 'I remember, added he, (for I then
lived with my Lord) I was in the Footman's Gallery, the Night when this Play of
the Provoked Husband was acted first. There was a great deal of low Stuff in it
about a Country Gentleman come up to Town to stand for Parliament Man; and
there they brought a Parcel of his Servants upon the Stage, his Coachman I
remember particularly; but the Gentlemen in our Gallery could not bear any
thing so low, and they damned it. I observe, Friend, you have left all that
Matter out, and you are to be commended for it.'

'Nay, Gentlemen, cries Jones, I can never maintain my Opinion against so many;
indeed if the Generality of his Audience dislike him, the learned Gentleman who
conducts the Show may have done very right in dismissing Punch from his
Service.'

The Master of the Show then began a second Harangue, and said much of the
great Force of Example, and how much the inferior Part of Mankind would be
deterred from Vice, by observing how odious it was in their Superiors; when he
was unluckily interrupted by an Incident, which, though perhaps we might have
omitted it at another Time, we cannot help relating at present, but not in this
Chapter.

CHAP. VI. From which it may be inferred, that the best Things are liable to be
misunderstood and misinterpreted.
A Violent Uproar now arose in the Entry, where my Landlady was well cuffing
her Maid both with her Fist and Tongue. She had indeed missed the Wench from
her Employment, and, after a little Search, had found her on the Puppet-show
Stage in Company with the Merry Andrew, and in a Situation not very proper to
be described.

Though Grace (for that was her Name) had forfeited all Title to Modesty, yet had
she not Impudence enough to deny a Fact in which she was actually surprised;
she therefore took another Turn, and attempted to mitigate the Offense. 'Why do
you beat me in this Manner, Mistress? cries the Wench. If you don't like my
Doings, you may turn me away. If I am a W -- e (for the other had liberally
bestowed that Appellation on her) my Betters are so as well as I? What was the
fine Lady in the Puppet-show just now. I suppose she did not lie all Night out
from her Husband for nothing.'

The Landlady now burst into the Kitchen, and fell foul on both her Husband and
the poor Puppet-mover. 'Here, Husband, says she, you see the Consequence of
harboring these People in your House. If one does draw a little Drink the more
for them, one is hardly made Amends for the Litter they make; and then to have
one's House made a Bawdyhouse of by such lousy Vermin. In short, I desire you
would be gone tomorrow Morning; for I will tolerate no more such Doings. It is
only the Way to teach our Servants Idleness and Nonsense; for to be sure
nothing better can be learned by such idle Shows as these. I remember when
Puppet-shows were made of good Scripture Stories, as Jephtha's Rash Vow, and
such good Things, and when wicked People were carried away by the Devil. There
was some Sense in those Matters; but as the Parson told us last Sunday, nobody
believes in the Devil nowadays; and here you bring about a Parcel of Puppets
dressed up like Lords and Ladies, only to turn the Heads of poor Country Wenches,
and when their Heads are once turned topsy turvy, no wonder every thing else is
so.'

Virgil, I think, tells us, that when the Mob are assembled in a riotous and
tumultuous Manner, and all Sorts of missible Weapons fly about, if a Man of
Gravity and Authority appears amongst them, the Tumult is presently appeased,
and the Mob, which when collected into one Body, may be well compared to an
Ass, erect their long Ears at the grave Man's Discourse.

On the contrary, when a Set of grave Men and Philosophers are disputing; when
Wisdom herself may in a Manner be considered as present, and administering
Arguments to the Disputants, should a Tumult arise among the Mob, or should one
Scold who is herself equal in Noise to a mighty Mob, appear among the said
Philosophers; their Disputes cease in a Moment, Wisdom no longer performs her
ministerial Office, and the Attention of every one is immediately attracted by
the Scold alone.

Thus the Uproar aforesaid, and the Arrival of the Landlady, silenced the
Master of the Puppet-shew, and put a speedy and final End to that grave and
solemn Harangue, of which we have given the Reader a sufficient Taste already.
Nothing indeed could have happened so very inopportune as this Accident; the
most wanton Malice of Fortune could not have contrived such another Stratagem
to confound the poor Fellow, while he was so triumphantly descanting on the
good Morals inculcated by his Exhibitions. His Mouth was now as effectually
stopped, as that of a Quack must be, if in the Midst of a Declamation on the
great Virtues of his Pills and Powders, the Corpse of one of his Martyrs should
be brought forth, and deposited before the Stage, as a Testimony of his Skill.

Instead, therefore, of answering my Landlady, the Puppet-show Man ran out to
punish his Merry Andrew; and now the Moon beginning to put forth her Silver
Light, as the Poets call it (though she looked at that Time more like a Piece of
Copper) Jones called for his Reckoning, and ordered Partridge, whom my Landlady
had just awaked from a profound Nap, to prepare for his Journey; but Partridge
having lately carried two Points, as my Reader has seen before, was emboldened
to attempt a third, which was to prevail with Jones to take up a Lodging that
Evening in the House where he then was. He introduced this with an affected
Surprise at the Intention which Mr. Jones declared of removing; and after
urging many excellent Arguments against it, he at last insisted strongly, that
it could be to no manner of Purpose whatever: For that unless Jones knew which
Way the Lady was gone, every Step he took might very possibly lead him the
farther from her; 'for you find Sir, said he, by all the People in the House,
that she is not gone this Way. How much better, therefore, would it be to stay
till the Moraing, when we may expect to meet with Somebody to enquire of?'

This last Argument had indeed some Effect on Jones, and while he was weighing
it, the Landlord threw all the Rhetoric of which he was Master into the same
Scale. 'Sure, Sir, said he, your Servant gives you most excellent Advice: For
who would travel by Night at this Time of the Year?' He then began in the usual
Style to trumpet forth the excellent Accommodation which his House afforded;
and my Landlady likewise opened on the Occasion -- But not to detain the Reader
with what is common to every Host and Hostess, it is sufficient to tell him,
Jones was at last prevailed on to stay and refresh himself with a few Hours
Rest, which indeed he very much wanted; for he had hardly shut his Eyes since
he had left the Inn where the Accident of the broken Head had happened.

As soon as Jones had taken a Resolution to proceed no farther that Night, he
presently retired to Rest, with his two Bed-fellows the Pocketbook, and the
Muff; but Partridge, who at several Times had refreshed himself with several
Naps, was more inclined to Eating than to Sleeping, and more to Drinking than
to either.

And now the Storm which Grace had raised being at an End, and my Landlady
being again reconciled to the Puppet-man, who on his Side forgave the indecent
Reflection which the good Woman in her Passion had cast on his Performances, a
Face of perfect Peace and Tranquillity reigned in the Kitchen; where there
assembled round the Fire, the Landlord and Landlady of the House, the Master of
the Puppet-show, the Attorney's Clerk, the Exciseman, and the ingenious Mr.
Partridge; in which Company past the agreeable Conversation which will be found
in the next Chapter.

CHAP. VII. Containing a Remark or two of our own, and many more of the good
Company assembled in the Kitchen.
THOUGH the Pride of Partridge did not submit to acknowledge himself a Servant,
yet he condescended in most Particulars to imitate the Manners of that Rank.
One Instance of this was his greatly magnifying the Fortune of his Companion,
as he called Jones: such is a general Custom with all Servants among Strangers,
as none of them would willingly be thought the Attendent on a Beggar: For the
higher the Situation of the Master is, the higher consequently is that of the
Man in his own Opinion; the Truth of which Observation appears from the
Behavior of all the Footmen of the Nobility.

But though Title and Fortune communicate a Splendour all around them, and the
Footmen of Men of Quality and of Estate think themselves entitled to a Part of
that Respect which is paid to the Quality and Estates of their Masters; it is
clearly otherwise with Regard to Virtue and Understanding. These Advantages are
strictly personal, and swallow themselves all the Respect which is paid to
them. To say the Truth, this is so very little, that they cannot well afford to
let any others partake with them. As these therefore reflect no Honor on the
Domestic, so neither is he at all dishonored by the most deplorable Want of
both in his Master. Indeed it is otherwise in the Want of what is called Virtue
in a Mistress, the Consequence of which we have before seen: For in this
Dishonor there is a Kind of Contagion, which, like that of Poverty,
communicates itself to all who approach it.

Now for these Reasons we are not to wonder that Servants (I mean among the Men
only) should have so great Regard for the Reputation of the Wealth of their
Masters, and little or none at all for their Character in other Points, and
that though they would be ashamed to be the Footman of a Beggar, they are not so
to attend upon a Rogue, or a Blockhead; and do consequently make no Scruple to
spread the Fame of the Iniquities and Follies of their said Masters as far as
possible, and this often with great Humor and Merriment. In reality, a Footman
is often a Wit, as well as a Beau, at the Expense of the Gentleman whose Livery
he wears.

After Partridge, therefore, had enlarged greatly on the vast Fortune to which
Mr. Jones was Heir, he very freely communicated an Apprehension which he had
begun to conceive the Day before, and for which, as we hinted at that very
Time, the Behavior of Jones seemed to have furnished a sufficient Foundation.
In short, he was now pretty well confirmed in an Opinion, that his Master was
out of his Wits, with which Opinion he very bluntly acquainted the good Company
round the Fire.

With this Sentiment the Puppet-show Man immediately coincided. 'I own, said
he, the Gentleman surprised me very much, when he talked so absurdly about
Puppet-shows. It is indeed hardly to be conceived that any Man in his Senses
should be so much mistaken; what you say now, accounts very well for all his
monstrous Notions. Poor Gentleman, I am heartily concerned for him; indeed he
has a strange Wildness about his Eyes, which I took Notice of before, though I
did not mention it.'

The Landlord agreed with this last Assertion, and likewise claimed the
Sagacity of having observed it. 'And certainly, added he, it must be so: for no
one but a Madman would have thought of leaving so good a House, to ramble about
the Country at that Time of Night.'

The Exciseman pulling his Pipe from his Mouth, said, 'He thought the Gentleman
looked and talked a little wildly,' and then turning to Partridge, 'If he be a
Madman, says he, he should not be suffered to travel thus about the Country,
for possibly he may do some Mischief. It is Pity he was not secured and sent
home to his Relations.'

Now some Conceits of this Kind were likewise lurking in the Mind of Partridge:
For as he was now persuaded that Jones had run away from Mr. Allworthy, he
promised himself the highest Rewards, if he could by any Means convey him back.
But Fear of Jones, of whose Fierceness and Strength he had seen, and indeed
felt some Instances, had however represented any such Scheme as impossible to
be executed, and had discouraged him from applying himself to form any regular
Plan for the Purpose. But no sooner did he hear the Sentiments of the
Exciseman, than he embraced that Opportunity of declaring his own, and
expressed a hearty Wish that such a Matter could be brought about.

'Could be brought about? says the Exciseman; why there is nothing easier.'

'Ah! Sir, answered Partridge; you don't know what a Devil of a Fellow he is.
He can take me up with one Hand, and throw me out at Window, and he would too,
if he did but imagine -- '

'Pogh!' says the Exciseman. 'I believe I am as good a Man as he.' Besides here
are five of us.

'I don't know what five,' cries the Landlady, 'my Husband shall have nothing
to do in it. Nor shall any violent Hands be laid upon any Body in my House. The
young Gentleman is as pretty a young Gentleman as ever I saw in my Life, and I
believe he is no more mad than any of us. What do you tell of his having a wild
Look with his Eyes? They are the prettiest Eyes I ever saw, and he has the
prettiest Look with them; and a very modest civil young Man he is. I am sure I
have bepitied him heartily ever since. The Gentleman there in the Corner told
us he was crossed in Love. Certainly it is enough to make any Man, especially
such a sweet young Gentleman as he is, to look a little otherwise than he did
before. Lady, indeed! What the Devil would the Lady have better than such a
handsome Man with a great Estate? I suppose she is one of your Quality-folks,
one of your Townly Ladies that we saw last Night in the Puppet-show, who don't
know what they would be at.'

The Attorney's Clerk likewise declared he would have no Concern in the
Business, without the Advice of Council. 'Suppose, syas he, an Action of false
Imprisonment should be brought against us, what Defense could we make? Who
knows what may be sufficient Evidence of Madness to a Jury? But I only speak
upon my own Account; for it don't look well for a Lawyer to be concerned in
these Matters, unless it be as a Lawyer. Juries are always less favorable to
us than to other People. I don't therefore dissuade you Mr. Thompson (to the
Exciseman) nor the Gentleman, nor any Body else.'

The Exciseman shook his Head at this Speech, and the Puppet-show-Man said,
'Madness was sometimes a difficult Matter for a Jury to decide: For I
remember,' says he, 'I was once present at a Trial of Madness, where twenty
Witnesses swore that the Person was as mad as a March Hare; and twenty others,
that he was as much in his Senses as any Man in England. -- And indeed it was
the Opinion of most People, that it was only a Trick of his Relations to rob
the poor Man of his Right.'

'Very likely! cries the Landlady, I myself knew a poor Gentleman who was kept
in a Mad-house all his Life by his Family, and they enjoyed his Estate, but it
did them no Good: For though the Law gave it them, it was the Right of another.'

'Pogh!' cries the Clerk, with great Contempt, Who has any Right but what the
Law gives them? If the Law gave me the best Estate in the Country, I should
never trouble myself much who had the Right.'

'If it be so, says Partridge, Felix quem faciunt aliena pericula cautum.'

My Landlord, who had been called out by the Arrival of a Horseman at the Gate,
now returned into the Kitchen, and with an affrighted Countenance cried out,
'What do you think, Gentlemen? the Rebels have given the Duke the Slip, and are
got almost to London -- It is certainly true, for a Man on Horseback just now
told me so.'

'I am glad of it with all my Heart.' cries Partridge, 'then there will be no
fighting in these Parts.

'I am glad, cries the Clerk, for a better Reason; 'for I would always have
Right take Place.

'Ay but, answered the Landlord, 'I have heard some People say this Man has no
Right.'

'I will prove the contrary in a Moment, cries the Clerk; if my Father dies
seized of a Right; do you mind me, seized of a Right, I say; Does not that
Right descend to his Son? And does not one Right descend as well as another?'

'But how can he have any Right to make us Papishes?' says the Landlord.

'Never fear that,' cries Partridge. 'As to the Matter of Right, the Gentleman
there has proved it as clear as the Sun; and as to the Matter of Religion, it
is quite out of the Case. The Papists themselves don't expect any such Thing. A
Popish Priest, whom I know very well, and who is a very honest Man, told me
upon his Word and Honor they had no such Design.'

'And another Priest of my Acquaintance, said the Landlady, has told me the
same Thing -- But my Husband is always so afraid of Papishes. I know a great
many Papishes that are very honest Sort of People, and spend their Money very
freely; and it is always a Maxim with me, that one Man's Money is as good as
another's.'

'Very true, Mistress,' said the Puppet-show-Man, I don't care what Religion
comes, provided the Presbyterians are not uppermost, for they are Enemies to
Puppet-shows.'

'And so you would sacrifice your Religion to your Interest?' cries the
Exciseman; and are desirous to see Propery brought in, are you?'

'Not I truly,' answered the other, 'I hate Popery as much as any Man; but yet
it is a Comfort to one, that one should be able to live under it, which I could
not do among Presbyterians. To be sure every Man values his Livelihood first,
that must be granted; and I warrant if you would confess the Truth, you are
more afraid of losing your Place than any Thing else; but, never fear, Friend,
there will be an Excise under another Government as well as under this.'

'Why certainly, replied the Exciseman, I should be a very ill Man if I did not
honor the King, whose Bread I eat. That is no more than natural as a Man may
say: For what signifies it to me that there would be an Excise-office under
another Government, since my Friends would be out, and I could expect no better
than to follow them. No, no, Friend, I shall never be bubbled out of my
Religion in Hopes only of keeping my Place under another Government; for I
should certainly be no better, and very probably might be worse.'

'Why, that is what I say, cries the Landlord, whenever Folks say who knows
what may happen? Odsooks! should not I be a Blockhead to lend my Money to I
know not who, because mayhap he may return it again? I am sure it is safe in my
own Bureau, and there I will keep it.'

The Attorney's Clerk had taken a great Fancy to the Sagacity of Partridge.
Whether this proceeded from the great Discernment which the former had into
Men, as well as Things, or whether it arose from the Sympathy between their
Minds; for they were both truly Jacobites in Principle; they now shook Hands
heartily, and drank Bumpers of strong Beer to Healths which we think proper to
bury in Oblivion.

These Healths were afterward pledged by all present, and even by my Landlord
himself, though reluctantly; but he could not withstand the Menaces of the Clerk,
who swore he would never set his Foot within his House again, if he refused.
The Bumpers which were swallowed on this Occasion soon put an End to the
Conversation. Here, therefore, we will put an End to the Chapter.

CHAP. VIII. In which Fortune seems to have been in a better Humor with Jones
than we have hitherto seen her.
AS there is no wholesomer, so perhaps there are few stronger Sleeping potions
than Fatigue. Of this Jones might be said to have taken a very large Dose, and
it operated very forcibly upon him. He had already slept nine Hours, and might
perhaps have slept longer, had he not been awaked by a most violent Noise at
his Chamber Door, where the Sound of many heavy Blows was accompanied with as
many Exclamations of Murder. Jones presently leapt from his Bed, where he found
the Master of the Puppet-show belabouring the Back and Ribs of his poor Merry
Andrew, without either Mercy or Moderation.

Jones instantly interposed on Behalf of the Suffering Party, and pinned the
insulting Conqueror up to the Wall: For the Puppet-show-Man was no more able to
contend with Jones, than the poor partycoloured Jester had been to contend with
this Puppet-man.

But though the Merry Andrew was a little Fellow, and not very strong, he had
nevertheless some Choler about him. He therefore no sooner found himself
delivered from the Enemy, than he began to attack him with the only weapon at
which he was his Equal. From this he first discharged a Volley of general
abusive Words, and thence proceeded to some particular Accusations -- 'D -- n
your Bl -- d, you Rascal, says he, I have not only supported you, for you owe
all the Money you get to me; but I have saved you from the Gallows. Did you not
want to rob the Lady of her fine Riding-Habit, no longer ago than Yesterday, in
the Back-lane here? Can you deny that you wished to have had her alone in a
Wood to strip her, to strip one of the prettiest Ladies that ever was seen in
the World? and here you have fallen upon me, and have almost murdered me for
doing no Harm to a Girl as willing as myself, only because she likes me better
than you.'

Jones no sooner heard this, than he quitted the Master, laying at the same
time the most violent Injunctions of Forbearance from any further Insult on the
Merry Andrew, and then taking the poor Wretch with him into his own Apartment,
he soon learnt tidings of his Sophia, whom the Fellow as he was attending his
Master with his Drum the Day before, had seen pass by. He easily prevailed with
the Lad to show him the exact Place, and then having summoned Partridge, he
departed with the utmost Expedition.

It was almost eight of the Clock before all Matters could be got ready for his
Departure: For Partridge was not in any Haste; nor could the Reckoning be
presently adjusted; and when both these were settled and over, Jones would not
quit the Place before he had perfectly reconciled all Differences between
Master and Man.

When this was happily accomplished, he set forwards, and was by the trusty
Merry Andrew conducted to the Spot where Sophia had past; and then having
handsomely rewarded his Conductor, he again pushed on with the utmost
eagerness, being highly delighted with the extraordinary Manner in which he
received his Intelligence. Of this Partridge was no sooner acquainted, than he,
with great Earnestness, began to prophesy, and assured Jones, that he would
certainly have good Success in the End: For, he said, 'two such Accidents could
never have happened 'to direct him after his Mistress, if Providence 'had not
designed to bring them together at last.' And this was the first Time that
Jones lent Attention to the Superstitious Doctrines of his Companion.

They had not gone above two Miles, when a violent Storm of Rain overtook them,
and as they happened to be at the same Time in Sight of an Alehouse, Partridge,
with much earnest Entreaty, prevailed with Jones to enter, and Weather the
Storm.

Hunger is an Enemy (if indeed it may be called one) which partakes more of the
English than of the French Disposition; for though you subdue this never so
often, it will always rally again in Time; and so it did with Partridge, who
was no sooner arrived within the Kitchen, than he began to ask the same
Questions which he had asked the Night before. The Consequence of this was an
excellent cold Chine being produced upon the Table, upon which not only
Partridge, but Jones himself, made a very hearty Breakfast, though the latter
began to grow again uneasy, as the People of the House could give him no fresh
Information concerning Sophia.

Their Meal being over, Jones was again preparing to sally, notwithstanding the
Violence of the Storm still continued; but Partridge begged heartily for
another Mugg, and at length casting his Eyes on a Lad at the Fire, who had
entered into the Kitchen, and who at that Instant was looking as earnestly at
him, he turned suddenly to Jones, and cried, 'Master, give me your Hand, a
single Mugg shall not serve the Turn this Bout. Why here is more News of Madam
Sophia come to Town. The Boy there standing by the Fire is the very Lad that
rid before her. I can swear to my own Plaster on his Face. Heavens bless you,
Sir, cries the Boy, it is your own Plaster sure enough; I shall have always
Reason to remember your Goodness; for it has almost cured me.'

At these Words Jones started from his Chair, and bidding the Boy follow him
immediately, departed from the Kitchen into a private Apartment; for so
delicate was he with regard to Sophia, that he never willingly mentioned her
Name in the Presence of many People; and though he had, as it were, from the
Overflowings of his Heart, given Sophia as a Toast among the Officers, where he
thought it was impossible she should be known; yet even there the Reader may
remember how difficultly he was prevailed upon to mention her Surname.

Hard therefore was it, and perhaps in the Opinion of many sagacious Readers,
very absurd and monstrous, that he should principally owe his present
Misfortune to the supposed Want of that Delicacy with which he so abounded; for
in reality Sophia was much more offended at the Freedoms which she thought, and
not without good Reason, he had taken with her Name and Character, than any
Freedoms, in which, under his present Circumstances, he had indulged himself
with the Person of another Woman; and to say Truth, I believe Honor would
never have prevailed on her to leave Upton without seeing her Jones, had it not
been for those two strong Instances of a Levity in his Behavior, so void of
all Respect, and indeed so highly inconsistent with any Degree of Love and
Tenderness in great and delicate Minds.

But so Matters fell out, and so I must relate them; and if any Reader is
shocked at their appearing unnatural, I cannot help it. I must remind such
Persons, that I am not writing a System, but a History, and I am not obliged to
reconcile every Matter to the received Notions concerning Truth and Nature. But
if this was never so easy to do, perhaps it might be more prudent in me to
avoid it. For Instance, as the Fact at present before us now stands, without
any Comment of mine upon it, though it may at first Sight offend some Readers,
yet upon more mature Consideration, it must please all; for wise and good Men
may consider what happened to Jones at Upton as a just Punishment for his
Wickedness, with Regard to Women, of which it was indeed the immediate
Consequence; and silly and bad persons may comfort themselves in their Vices,
by flattering their own Hearts that the Characters of Men are rather owing to
Accident than to Virtue. Now perhaps the Reflections which we should be here
inclined to draw, would alike contradict both these Conclusions, and would show
that these Incidents contribute only to confirm the great, useful and uncommon
Doctrine, which it is the Purpose of this whole Work to inculcate, and which we
must not fill up our Pages by frequently repeating, as an ordinary Parson fills
his Sermon by repeating his Text at the End of every Paragraph.

We are contented that it must appear, however unhappily Sophia had erred in
her Opinion of Jones, she had sufficient Reason for her Opinion; since, I
believe, every other young-Lady would, in her Situation, have erred in the same
Manner. Nay, had she followed her Lover at this very Time, and had entered this
very Alehouse the Moment he was departed from it, she would have found the
Landlord as well acquainted with her Name and Person as the Wench at Upton had
appeared to be. For while Jones was examining his Boy in Whispers in an inner
Room, Partridge, who had no such Delicacy in his Disposition, was in the
Kitchen very openly catechizing the other Guide who attended Mrs. Fitzpatrick;
by which Means the Landlord, whose Ears were open enough on all such Occasions,
became perfectly well acquainted with the Tumble of Sophia from her Horse, etc.
with the Mistake concerning Jenny Cameron, with the many Consequences of the
Punch, and, in short, with almost every thing which had happened at the Inn,
whence we dispatched our Ladies in a Coach and Six, when we last took our
Leaves of them.

CHAP. IX. Containing little more than a few odd Observations.
JONES had been absent a full half Hour, when he returned into the Kitchen in a
Hurry, desiring the Landlord to let him know that Instant what was to pay. And
now the Concern which Partridge felt at being obliged to quit a warm
Chimney-corner, and a Cup of excellent Liquor, was somewhat compensated by
hearing he was to proceed no farther on Foot; for Jones, by Golden Arguments,
had prevailed with the Boy to attend him back to the Inn whither he had before
conducted Sophia; but to this however the Lad consented, upon Condition that
the other Guide would wait for him at the Alehouse; because, as the Landlord at
Upton was an intimate Acquaintance of the Landlord at Gloucester, it might some
Time or other come to the Ears of the latter, that his Horses had been let to
more than one Person, and so the Boy might be brought to Account for Money
which he wisely intended to put in his own Pocket.

We were obliged to mention this Circumstance, trifling as it may seem, since
it retarded Mr. Jones a considerable Time in his setting out; for the honesty
of this latter Boy was somewhat high -- that is, somewhat high-priced, and
would indeed have cost Jones very dear, had not Partridge, who, as we have
said, was a very cunning Fellow, artfully thrown in half a Crown to be spent at
that very Alehouse, while the Boy was waiting for his Companion. This half
Crown the Landlord no sooner got Scent of, than he opened after it with such
vehement and persuasive Outcry, that the Boy was soon overcome, and consented
to take half a Crown more for his Stay. Here we cannot help observing, that as
there is so much of Policy in the lowest Life, great Men often overvalue
themselves on those Refinements in Imposture, in which they are frequently
excelled by some of the lowest of the Human Species.

The Horses being now produced, Jones directly leapt into the Side-Saddle, on
which his dear Sophia had rid. The Lad indeed very civilly offered him, the Use
of his; but he chose the Side-Saddle, probably because it was softer.
Partridge, however, though full as effeminate as Jones, could not bear the
Thoughts of degrading his Manhood, he therefore accepted the Boy's offer; and
now Jones, being mounted on the Side-Saddle of his Sophia, the Boy on that of
Mrs. Honor, and Partridge bestriding the third Horse, they set forwards on
their Journey, and within four Hours arrived at the Inn where the Reader has
already spent so much Time. Partridge was in very high Spirits during the whole
Way, and often mentioned to Jones the many good Omens of his future Success,
which had lately befriended him; and which the Reader, without being the least
superstitious, must allow to have been peculiarly fortunate. Partridge was
moreover better pleased with the present Pursuit of his Companion, than he had
been with his Pursuit of Glory; and from these very Omens, which assured the
Pedagogue of Success, he likewise first acquired a clear Idea of the Amor
between Jones and Sophia; to which he had before given very little Attention,
as he had originally taken a wrong Scent concerning the Reasons of Jones's
Departure; and as to what happened at Upton, he was too much frightened just
before and after his leaving that Place, to draw any other Conclusions from
thence, than that Jones was a downright Madman: A conceit which was not at all
disagreeable to the Opinion he before had of his extraordinary Wildness, of
which, he thought, his Behavior on their quitting Gloucester, so well
justified all the Accounts he had formerly received. He was how however pretty
well satisfied with his present Expedition, and henceforth began to conceive
much worthier Sentiments of his Friend's Understanding.

The Clock had just struck Three when they arrived, and Jones immediately
bespoke Post Horses; but unluckily there was not a Horse to be procured in the
whole Place; which the Reader will not wonder at, when he considers the Hurry
in which the whole Nation, and especially this Part of it, was at this time
engaged, when Expresses were passing and repassing every Hour of the Day and
Night.

Jones endeavored all he could to prevail with his former Guide to escorte him
to Coventry; but he was inexorable. While he was arguing with the Boy in the
Inn-yard, a Person came up to him, and saluting him by his Name, enquired how
all the good Family did in Somersetshire; and now Jones casting his Eyes upon
this Person, presently discovered him to be Mr. Dowling the Lawyer, with whom
he had dined at Gloucester, and with much Courtesy returned his Salutation.

Dowling very earnestly pressed Mr. Jones to go no further that Night; and
backed his Solicitations with many unanswerable Arguments, such as, that it was
almost dark, that the Roads were very dirty, and that he would be able to
travel much better by Daylight, with many others equally good, some of which
Jones had probably suggested to himself before; but as they were then
ineffectual, so they were still, and he continued resolute in his Design, even
though he should be obliged to set out on Foot.

When the good Attorney found he could not prevail on Jones to stay, he as
strenuously applied himself to persuade the Guide to accompany him. He urged
many Motives to induce him to undertake this short Journey, and at last
concluded with saying, 'Do you think the Gentleman will not very well reward you
for your Trouble?'

Two to one are odds at every other thing, as well as at Football. But the
Advantage which this united Force has in Persuasion or Entreaty, must have
been visible to a curious Observer; for he must have often seen, that when a
Father, a Master, a Wife, or any other Person in Authority, have stoutly
adhered to a Denial against all the Reasons which a single Man could produce,
they have afterward yielded to the Repetition of the same Sentiments by a
second or third Person, who has undertaken the Cause without attempting to
advance any thing new in its Behalf. And hence perhaps proceeds the Phrase of
seconding an Argument or a Motion, and the great Consequence of which this is
in all Assemblies of public Debate. Hence likewise probably it is, that in our
Courts of Law we often hear a learned Gentleman (generally a Sergeant)
repeating for an Hour together what another learned Gentleman who spoke before
him had just been saying.

Instead of accounting for this, we shall proceed in our usual Manner to
exemplify it in the Conduct of the Lad abovementioned, who submitted to the
Persuasions of Mr. Dowling, and promised once more to admit Jones into his
Side-Saddle; but insisted on first giving the poor Creatures a good Bait,
saying, they had traveled a great Ways, and been rid very hard. Indeed this
Caution of the Boy was needless; for Jones, notwithstanding his Hurry and
Impatience, would have ordered this of himself; for he by no Means agreed with
the Opinions of those who consider Animals as mere Machines, and when they bury
their Spurs in the Belly of their Horse, imagine the Spur and the Horse to have
an equal Capacity of feeling Pain.

While the Beasts were eating their Corn, or rather were supposed to eat it;
(for as the Boy was taking Care of himself in the Kitchen, the Ostler took
great Care that his Corn should not be consumed in the Stable) Mr. Jones, at
the earnest Desire of Mr. Dowling, accompanied that Gentleman into his Room,
where they sat down together over a Bottle of Wine.

CHAP. X. In which Mr. Jones and Mr. Dowling drink a Bottle together.
MR. Dowling, pouring out a Glass of Wine, named the Health of the good Squire
Allworthy; adding, 'If you please, Sir, we will likewise remember his Nephew
and Heir, the young Squire: Come, Sir, here is Mr. Blifil to you, a very pretty
young Gentleman; and who, I dare swear, will hereafter make a very considerable
Figure in his Country. I have a Borough for him myself in my Eye.'

'Sir, answered Jones, I am convinced you don't intend to affront me, so I
shall not resent it; but, I promise you, you have joined two Persons very
improperly together; for one is the Glory of the human-Species, and the other
is a Rascal who dishonours the Name of a Man.'

Dowling stared at this. He said, 'He thought both the Gentlemen had a very
unexceptionable Character. 'As for Squire Allworthy himself, says he, 'I never
had the Happiness to see him; but all the World talks of his Goodness. And,
indeed, as to the young Gentleman, I never saw him but once, when I carried him
the News of the Loss of his Mother; and then I was so hurried, and drove, and
tore with the Multiplicity of Business, that I had hardly Time to converse with
him; but he looked so like a very honest Gentleman, and behaved himself so
prettily, that I protest I never was more delighted with any Gentleman since I
was born.'

'I don't wonder,' answered Jones, that he should impose upon you in so short
an Acquaintance; for he has the Cunning of the Devil himself, and you may live
with him many Years without discovering him. I was bred up with him from my
Infancy, and we were hardly ever asunder; but it is very lately only, that I
have discovered half the Villainy which is in him. I own I never greatly liked
him. I thought he wanted that Generosity of Spirit, which is the sure
Foundation of all that is great and noble in Human Nature. I saw a Selfishness
in him long ago which I despised; but it is lately, very lately, that I have
found him capable of the basest and blackest Designs; for indeed, I have at
last found out, that he has taken an Advantage of the Openness of my own
Temper, and has concerted the deepest Project, by a long Train of wicked
Artifice, to work my Ruin, which at last he has effected.'

'Ay! ay! cries Dowling, I protest then, it is a Pity such a Person should
inherit the great Estate of your Uncle Allworthy.'

'Alas, Sir, cries Jones. you do me an Honor to which I have no Title. It is
true, indeed, his Goodness once allowed me the Liberty of calling him by a much
nearer Name; but as this was a voluntary Act of Goodness only, I can complain
of no Injustice when he thinks proper to deprive me of this Honor; since the
Loss cannot be more unmerited than the Gift originally was. I assure you, Sir,
I am no Relation of Mr. Allworthy; and if the World, who are incapable of
setting a true Value on his Virtue, should think, in his Behavior by me, he
has dealt hardly by a Relation, they do an Injustice to the best of Men: For I
-- but I ask your Pardon, I shall trouble you with no Particulars relating to
myself; only as you seemed to think me a Relation of Mr. Allworthy, I thought
proper to set you right in a Matter that might draw some Censures upon him,
which I promise you I would rather lose my life than give Occasion to.'

'I protest, Sir, cried Dowling, you talk very much like a Man of Honor; but
instead of giving me any Trouble, I protest it would give me great Pleasure to
know how you came to be thought a Relation of Mr. Allworthy's, if you are not.
Your Horses will not be ready this half Hour, and as you have sufficient
Opportunity, I wish you would tell me how all that happened; for I protest it
seems very surprising that you should pass for a Relation of a Gentleman,
without being so.'

Jones, who in the Compliance of his Disposition (though not in his Prudence) a
little resembled his lovely Sophia, was easily prevailed on to satisfy Mr.
Dowling's Curiosity, by relating the History of his Birth and Education, which
he did, like Othello,

-- even from his boyish Years, To the very Moment he was bad to tell. the
which to hear, Dowling, like Desdemona, did seriousy incline;

He swore 'twas strange, 'twas passing strange;
'Twas pitiful, 'twas wondrous pitiful.
Mr. Dowling was indeed very greatly affected with this Relation; for he had
not divested himself of Humanity by being an Attorney. Indeed nothing is more
unjust than to carry our Prejudices against a Profession into private Life, and
to borrow our Idea of a Man from our Opinion of his Calling. Habit, it is true,
lessens the Horror of those Actions which the Profession makes necessary, and
consequently habitual; but in all other Instances, Nature works in Men of all
Professions alike; nay, perhaps, even more strongly with those who give her, as
it were, a Holiday, when they are following their ordinary Business. A Butcher,
I make no doubt, would feel Compunction at the Slaughter of a fine Horse; and
though a Surgeon can conceive no Pain in cutting off a Limb, I have known him
compassionate a Man in a Fit of the Gout. The common Hangman, who has
stretched the Neck of Hundreds, is known to have trembled at his first
Operation on a Head: And the very Professors of Human Blood, who in their Trade
of War butcher Thousands, not only of their Fellow Professors, but often of
Women and Children, without Remorse; even these, I say, in Times of Peace when
Drums and Trumpets are laid aside, often lay aside all their Ferocity, and
become very gentle Members of civil Society. In the same Manner an Attorney may
feel all the Miseries and Distresses of his Fellow Creatures, provided he
happens not to be concerned against them.

Jones, as the Reader knows, was yet unacquainted with the very black Colors
in which he had been represented to Mr. Allworthy; and as to other Matters he
did not show them in the most disadvantageous Light: For though he was
unwilling to cast any Blame on his former Friend and Patron, yet he was not
very desirous of heaping too much upon himself. Dowling therefore observed, and
not without Reason, that very ill Offices must have been done him by some Body:
'For certainly, cries he, the Squire would never have disinherited you only for
a few Faults, which any young Gentleman might have committed. Indeed I cannot
properly say disinherited; for to be sure by Law you cannot claim as Heir.
That Is certain; that no Body need go to Council for. Yet when a Gentleman had
in a Manner adopted you thus as his own Son, you might reasonably have expected
some considerable Part, if not the Whole; nay, if you had expected the Whole, I
should not have blamed you: For certainly every one is for getting as much as
they can, and they are not to be blamed on that Account.'

'Indeed you wrong me, said Jones; 'I should have been contented with very
little: I never had any View upon Mr. Allworthy's Fortune; nay, I believe, I
may truly say, I never once considered what he could or might give me. This I
solemnly declare, if he had done a Prejudice to his Nephew in my Favor, I
would have undone it again. I had rather enjoy my own Mind than the Fortune of
another Man. What is the poor Pride arising from a magnificent House, a
numerous Equipage, a splendid Table, and from all the other Advantages or
Appearances of Fortune, compared to the warm, solid Content, the swelling
Satisfaction, the thrilling Transports, and the exulting Triumphs, which a good
Mind enjoys, in the Contemplation of a generous, virtuous, noble, benevolent
Action? I envy not Blifil in the Prospect of his Wealth; nor shall I envy him
in the Possession of it. I would not think myself a Rascal half an Hour, to
exchange Situations. I believe, indeed, Mr. Blifil suspected me of the Views
you mention; and I suppose these Suspicions, as they arose from the Baseness of
his own Heart, so they occasioned his Baseness to me. But I thank Heaven, I
know, I feel, -- I feel my Innocence, my Friend; and I would not part with that
Feeling for the World. -- For as long as I know I have never done, nor even
designed an Injury to any Being whatever,

Pone me pigris ubi nulla campis
Arbor aestiva recreatur aur a
Quod latus mundi nebulae, malusque
Jupiter urget.
Pone, sub curru nimium propinqui
Solis, in Terra domibus negata;
Dulce ridentem Lalagen amabo
Dulce loquentem.'
Place me where never Summer Breeze
Unbinds the Glebe, or warms the Trees;
Where ever lowering Clouds appear,
And angry Jove deforms th'inclement Year.
Place me beneath the burning Ray,
Where rolls the rapid Carr of Day;
Love and the Nymph shall charm my Toils,
The Nymph who sweetly speaks, and sweetly smiles.
Mr. Francis.


He then filled a Bumper of Wine, and drank it off to the Health of his dear
Lalage; and filling Dowling's Glass likewise up to the Brim, insisted on his
pledging him. 'Why then here is Miss Lalage's Health, with all my Heart; cries
Dowling. I have heard her toasted often, I protest, though I never saw her; but
they say she is extremely handsome.'

Though the Latin was not the only Part of this Speech which Dowling did not
perfectly understand, yet there was somewhat in it, that made a very strong
Impression upon him. And though he endeavored, by winking, nodding, sneering,
and grinning, to hide the Impression from Jones, (for we are as often ashamed
of thinking right as of thinking wrong) it is certain he secretly approved as
much of his Sentiments as he understood, and really felt a very strong Impulse
of Compassion for him. But we may possibly take some other Opportunity of
commenting upon this, especially if we should happen to meet Mr. Dowling any
more in the Course of our History. At present we are obliged to take our Leave
of that Gentleman a little abrubtly, in Imitation of Mr. Jones; who was no
sooner informed, by Partridge, that his Horses were ready, than he deposited
his Reckoning, wished his Companion a good Night, mounted, and set forward
toward Coventry, though the Night was dark, and it just then began to rain
very hard.

CHAP. XI. The Disasters which befell Jones on his Departure for Coventry; with
the sage Remarks of Partridge.
NO Road can be plainer than that from the Place they now were to Coventry; and
though neither Jones nor Partridge, nor the Guide, had ever traveled it
before, it would have been almost impossible to have missed their Way, had it
not been for the two Reasons mentioned in the Conclusion of the last Chapter.

These two Circumstences, however, happening both unfortunately to intervene,
our Travelers deviated into a much less frequented Track; and after riding
full Six miles, instead of arriving at the stately Spires of Coventry, they
found themselves still in a very dirty Lane, where they saw no Symptoms of
approaching the Suburbs of a large City.

Jones now declared that they must certainly have lost their Way; but this the
Guide insisted upon was impossible; a Word which, in common Conversation, is
often used not only to signify improbable, but often what is really very
likely, and, sometimes, what has certainly happened: An hyperbolical Violence
like that which is so frequently offered to the Words Infinite and Eternal; by
the former of which it is usual to express a Distance of half a Yard; and by
the latter, a Duration of five Minutes. And thus it is as usual to assert the
impossibility of losing what is already actually lost. This was, in fact, the
Case at present: For notwithstanding all the confident Assertions of the Lad to
the contrary, it is certain they were no more in the right Road to Coventry,
than the fradulent, griping, cruel, canting Miser is in the right Road to
Heaven.

It is not, perhaps, easy for a Reader who has never been in those
Circumstances, to imagine the Horror with which Darkness, Rain, and Wind fill
Persons who have lost their Way in the Night; and who, consequently, have not
the pleasant Prospect of warm Fires, dry Clothes, and other Refreshments, to
support their Minds in struggling with the Inclemencies of the Weather. A very
imperfect Idea of this Horror will, however, serve sufficiently to account for
the Conceits which now filled the Head of Partridge, and which we shall
presently be obliged to open.

Jones grew more and more positive that they were out of their Road; and the
Boy himself, at last, acknowledged he believed they were not in the right Road
to Coventry; though he affirmed, at the same Time, it was impossible they should
have mist the Way. But Partridge was of a different Opinion. He said, 'When
they first set out he imagined some Mischief or other would happen. -- Did not
you observe, Sir,' said he to Jones, that old Woman who stood at the Door just
as you was taking Horse? I wish you had given her a small Matter, with all my
Heart; for she said then you might repent it, and at that very Instant it began
to rain, and the Wind has continued rising ever since. Whatever some People
may think, I am very certain it is in the Power of Witches to raise the Wind
whenever they please. I have seen it happen very often in my Time: And if ever
I saw a Witch in all my Life, that old Woman was certainly one. I thought so to
myself at that very Time; and if I had had any Halfpence in my Pocket, I would
have given her some: For to be sure it is always good to be charitable to those
Sort of People, for Fear what may happen; and many a Person has lost his
Cattle by saving a Halfpenny.'

Jones though he was horridly vexed at the Delay which this Mistake was likely to
occasion in his Journey, could not help smiling at the Superstition of his
Friend, whom an Accident now greatly confirmed in his Opinion. This was a
Tumble from his Horse; by which, however, he received no other Injury than what
the Dirt conferred on his Clothes.

Partridge had no sooner recovered his Legs, than he appealed to his Fall, as
conclusive Evidence of all he had asserted: But Jones, finding he was unhurt,
answered with a Smile: 'This Witch of yours, Partridge, is a most ungrateful
Jade, and does not, I find, distinguish her Friends from others in her
Resentment. If the old Lady had been angry with me for neglecting her, I don't
see why she should tumble you from your Horse, after all the Respect you have
expressed for her.'

'It is ill jesting, cries Partridge, with People who have Power to do these
Things; for they are often very malicious. I remember a Farrier, who provoked
one of them, by asking her when the Time she had bargained with the Devil for
would be out; and within three Months from that very Day one of his best Cows
was drowned. Nor was she satisfied with that; for a little Time afterward he
lost a Barrel of Best-Drink: For the old Witch pulled out the Spicket, and let
it run all over the Cellar, the very first Evening he had tapped it, to make
merry with some of his Neighbors. In short, nothing ever thrived with him
afterward; for she worried the poor Man so, that he took to Drinking; and in a
Year or two his Stock was seized, and he and his Family are now come to the
Parish.'

The Guide, and perhaps his Horse too, were both so attentive to this
Discourse, that, either through Want of Care, or by the Malice of the Witch, they
were now both sprawling in the Dirt.

Partridge entirely imputed this Fall, as he had done his own, to the same
Cause. He told Mr. Jones, 'it would certainly be his Turn next,' and earnestly
entreated him 'to return back, and find out the old Woman, and pacify her. We
shall very soon, added he, reach the Inn: For though we have seemed to go
forward, I am very certain we are in the identical Place in which we were an
Hour ago; and I dare swear if it was Daylight, we might now see the Inn we set
out from.'

Instead of returning any Answer to this sage Advice, Jones was entirely
attentive to what had happened to the Boy, who received no other Hurt than what
had before befallen Pattridge, and which his Clothes very easily bore, as they
had been for many Years inured to the like. He soon regained his Side-Saddle,
and, by the hearty Curses and Blows which he bestowed on his Horse, quickly
satisfied Mr. Jones that no Harm was done.

CHAP. XII. Relates that Mr. Jones continued his Journey contrary to the Advice
of Partridge, with what happened on that Occasion.
THEY now discovered a Light at some Distance, to the great Pleasure of Jones,
and to the no small Terror of Partridge, who firmly believed himself to be
bewitched, and that this Light was a Jack with a Lanthorn, or somewhat more
mischievous.

But how were these Fears increased, when, as they approached nearer to this
Light, (or Lights as they now appeared) they heard a confused Sound of Human
Voices; of singing, laughing, and hallowing, together with a strange Noise that
seemed to proceed from some Instruments; but could hardly be allowed the Name
of Music. Indeed, to favor a little the Opinion of Partridge, it might very
well be called Music bewitched.

It is impossible to conceive a much greater Degree of Horror than what now
seized on Partridge; the Contagion of which had reached the Post-boy; who had
been very attentive to many Things that the other had uttered. He now therefore
joined in petitioning Jones to return; saying he firmly believed what Partridge
had just before said, that though the Horses seemed to go on, they had not moved
a Step forwards during at least the last half Hour.

Jones could not help smiling in the midst of his Vexation, at the Fears of
these poor Fellows. 'Either we advance, says he, toward the Lights, or the
Lights have advanced toward us; for we are now at a very little Distance from
them; but how can either of you be afraid of a Set of People who appear only to
be merry-making?'

'Merry-making, Sir!' cries Partridge, 'who could be merry-making at this Time
of Night, and in such a Place, and such weather? They can be nothing but Ghosts
or Witches, or some Evil Spirits or other, that is certain.'

'Let them be what they will,' cries Jones, 'I am resolved to go up to them,
and enquire the Way to Coventry. All Witches, Partridge, are not such
ill-natured Hags, as that we had the Misfortune to meet with last.'

'Oh Lord, Sir! cries Partridge, there is no knowing what Humor they will be
in; to be sure it is always best to be civil to them; but what if we should
meet with something worse than Witches, with Evil Spirits themselves -- Pray,
Sir, be advised; pray, Sir, do. If you had read so many terrible Accounts as I
have of these Matters, you would not be so Foolhardy -- The Lord knows whither
we have got already, or whither we are going: For sure such Darkness was never
seen upon Earth, and I question whether it can be darker in the other World.'

Jones put forwards as fast as he could, notwithstanding all these Hints and
Cautions, and poor Partridge was obliged to follow: For though he hardly dared
advance, he dared still less to stay behind by himself.

At length they arrived at the Place whence the Lights and different Noises had
issued. This Jones perceived to be no other than a Barn where a great Number of
Men and Women were assembled, and were diverting themselves with much apparent
Jollity.

Jones no sooner appeared before the great Doors of the Barn, which were open,
than a masculine and very rough Voice from within demanded who was there? -- To
which Jones gently answered, a Friend; and immediately asked the Road to
Coventry.

'If you are a Friend, cries another of the Men in the Barn, you had better
alight till the Storm is over, (for indeed it was now more violent than ever)
you are very welcome to put up your Horse, for there is sufficient Room for him
at one End of the Barn.'

'You are very obliging,' returned Jones; 'and I will accept your Offer for a
few Minutes, whilst the Rain continues; and here are two more who will be glad
of the same Favor.' This was accorded with more Good Will than it was
accepted: For Partridge would rather have submitted to the utmost Inclemency of
the Weather, than have trusted to the Clemency of those whom he took for
Hobgoblins; and the poor Post-boy was now infected with the same Apprehensions;
but they were both obliged to follow the Example of Jones; the one because he
durst not leave his Horse, and the other because he feared nothing so much as
being left by himself.

Had this History been writ in the Days of Superstition, I should have had too
much Compassion for the Reader to have left him so long in Suspense, whether
Beelzebub or Satan was about actually to appear in Person, with all his Hellish
Retinue; but as these Doctrines are at present very unfortunate, and have but
few if any Believers, I have not been much aware of conveying any such Terrors.
To say Truth, the whole Furniture of the infernal Regions has long been
appropriated by the Managers of Playhouses, who seem lately to have lain them
by as Rubbish, capable only of affecting the Upper Gallery; a Place in which
few of our Readers ever sit.

However, though we do not suspect raising any great Terror on this Occasion, we
have Reason to fear some other Apprehensions may arise in our Reader, into
which we would not willingly betray him, I mean that we are going to take a
Voyage into Fairy Land, and to introduce a Set of Beings into our History,
which scarce any one was ever childish enough to believe, though many have been
foolish enough to spend their Time in writing and reading their Adventures.

To prevent therefore any such Suspicions, so prejudicial to the Credit of an
Historian, who professes to draw his Materials from Nature only, we shall now
proceed to acquaint the Reader who these People were, whose sudden Appearance
had struck such Terrors into Partridge, had more than half frightened the
Post-Boy, and had a little surprised even Mr. Jones himself.

The People then assembled in this Barn were no other than a Company of
Egyptians, or as they are vulgarly called Gypsies, and they were now
celebrating the Wedding of one of their Society.

It is impossible to conceive a happier Set of People than appeared here to be
met together. The utmost Mirth indeed showed itself in every Countenance; nor
was their Ball totally void of all Order and Decorum. Perhaps it had more than
a Country Assembly is sometimes conducted with: For these People are subject to
a formal Government and Laws of their own, and all pay Obedience to one great
Magistrate whom they call their King.

Greater Plenty likewise was no where to be seen, than what flourished in this
Barn. Here was indeed no Nicety nor Elegance, nor did the keen Appetite of the
Guests require any. Here was good Store of Bacon, Fowls, and Mutton, to which
every one present provided better Sauce himself, than the best and dearest
French Cook can prepare.

Aeneas is not described under more Consternation in the Temple of Juno,

Dum stupet obtutuque haeret defixus in uno. than was our Hero at what he saw
in this Barn. While he was looking every where round him with Astonishment, a
venerable Person approached him with many friendly Salutations, rather of too
hearty a Kind to be called courtly. This was no other than the King of the
Gypsies himself. He was very little distingnished in Dress from his Subjects,
nor had he any Regalia of Majesty to support his Dignity; and yet there seemed
(as Mr. Jones said) to be somewhat in his Air which denoted Authority, and
inspired the Beholders with an Idea of Awe and Respect; though all this was
perhaps imaginary in Jones, and the Truth may be, that such Ideas are incident
to Power, and almost inseparable from it.

There was somewhat in the open Countenance and courteous Behavior of Jones,
which being acompanied with much Comeliness of Person, greatly recommended him
at first Sight to every Beholder. These were perhaps a little heightened in the
present Instance, by that profound Respect which he paid to the King of the
Gypsies, the Moment he was acquainted with his Dignity, and which was the
sweeter to his Gypseian Majesty, as he was not used to receive such Homage from
any but his own Subjects.

The King ordered a Table to be spread with the choicest of their Provisions
for his Accommodation, and having placed himself at his Right Hand, his Majesty
began to discourse our Hero in the following Mannner:

'Me doubt not, Sir, but you have often seen some of my People, who are what
you call de Parties detache: For dey go about every where; but me fancy you
imagine not we be so considerable Body as we be, and may be you will surprise
more, when you hear de Gypsy be as orderly and well govern People as any upon
Face of de Earth.'

'Me have Honor, as me say, to be deir King, and no Monarch can do boast of
more dutiful Subject, ne no more affectionate. How far me deserve deir
Goodwill, me no say, but dis me can say, dat me never design any Ting but to do
them Good. Me sall no do boast of dat neider: For what can me do oderwise dan
consider of de Good of dose poor People who go about all Day to give me always
de best of what dey get. Dey love and honor me darefore, because me do love
and take Care of them; dat is all, me know no oder Reason.'

'About a tousand or two tousand Years ago, me cannot tell to a Year or two, as
can neider write nor read, there was a great what you call, -- a Volution among
de Gypsy; for dear was de Lord Gypsy in dose Days; and dese Lord did quarrel
vid one anoder about de Place; but de King of de Gypsy did demolish them all,
and made all his Subject equal vid each oder; and since dat time dey have agree
very well: for dey no tink of being King, and may be it be better for them as
dey be: For me assure you it be ver troublesome ting to be King, and always to
do Justice; me have often wish to be de private Gypsy when me have been forced
to punish my dear Friend and Relation; for dough we never put to Death, our
Punishments be ver severe. Dey make de Gypsy ashamed of demselves, and dat be
ver terrible Punishment; me ave scarce ever known de Gypsy so punish do Harm
any more.'

The King then proceeded to express some Wonder that there was no such
Punishment as Shame in other Governments. Upon which Jones assured him to the
contrary: For there were many Crimes for which Shame was inflicted by the
English Laws, and that it was indeed one Consequence of all Punishment. 'Dat be
ver strange, said the King: For me know and hears good deal of your People,
dough me no live among them, and me ave often hear dat Sham is de Consequence
and de Cause too of many your Rewards. Are your Rewards and Punishments den de
same Ting?'

While his Majesty was thus discoursing with Jones, a sudden Uproar arose in
the Barn, and as it seems, upon this Occasion: The Curtesy of these People by
Degrees had removed all Apprehensions of Partridge, and he was prevailed upon
not only to stuff himself with their Food, but to taste some of their Liquors,
which by Degrees entirely expelled all Fear from his Composition, and in its
Stead introduced much more agreeable Sensations.

A young Female Gypsy, more remarkable for her Wit than her Beauty, had decoyed
the honest Fellow aside, pretending to tell his Fortune. Now when they were
alone together in a remote Part of the Barn, whither it proceeded from the
strong Liquor, which is never so apt to inflame inordinate Desire as after
moderate Fatigue, or whither the fair Gypsy herself threw aside the Delicacy
and Decency of her Sex, and tempted the Youth Partridge with express
Solicitations; but they were discovered in a very improper Manner by the
Husband of the Gypsy, who from Jealousy, it seems, had kept a watchful Eye over
his Wife, and had dogged her to the Place, where he found her in the Arms of
her Gallant.

To the great Coufusion of Jones, Partridge was now hurried before the King;
who heard the Accusation, and likewise the Culprit's Defense, which was indeed
very trifling: For the poor Fellow was confounded by the plain Evidence which
appeared against him, and had very little to say for himself. His Majesty then
turning toward Jones, said, 'Sir, you have hear what dey say, what Punishment
do you tink your Man deserve?'

Jones answered, 'He was sorry for what had happened, and that Partridge should
make the Husband all the Amends in his Power: He said, he had very little Money
about him at that Time, and putting his Hand into his Pocket, offered the
Fellow a Guinea.' To which he immediately answered, He hoped his Honor would
not think of giving him less than five.'

This Sum after some Altercation was reduced to two, and Jones having
stipulated for the full Forgiveness of both Partridge and the Wife, was going
to pay the Money; when his Majesty restraining his Hand, turned to the Witness,
and asked him, 'At what Time he had discovered the Criminals?' To which he
answered, That he had been desired by the Husband to watch the Motions of his
Wife from her first speaking to the Stranger, and that he had never lost Sight
of her afterward till the Crime had been committed.' The King then asked, 'If
the Husband was with him all that Time in his lurking Place?' To which he
answered in the Affirmative. His Egyptian Majesty then addressed himself to
the Husband as follows, 'Me be sorry to see any Gypsy dat have no more Honor
dan to sell de Honor of his Wife for Money. If you had had de Love for your
Wife, you would have prevented dis Matter, and not endeavor to make her de
Whore dat you might discover her. Me do order dat you have no Money given you,
for you deserve Punishment not Reward; me do order derefore, dat you be de
infamous Gypsy, and do wear Pair of Horns upon your Forehead for one Month, and
dat your Wife be called de Whore, and pointed at all dat Time: For you be de
infamous Gypsy, but she be no less de infamous Whore.'

The Gypsies immediately proceeded to execute the Sentence, and left Jones and
Partridge alone with his Majesty.

Jones greatly applauded the Justice of the Sentence; upon which the King
turning to him said, 'Me believe you be surprise: For me suppose you have ver
bad Opinion of my People; me suppose you tink us all de Tieves.'

'I must confess, Sir," said Jones, I have not heard so favorable an Account
of them as they seem to deserve.'

'Me vil tell you,' said the King, how the Difference is between you and us. My
People rob your People, and your People rob one anoder.'

Jones afterward proceeded very gravely to sing forth the Happiness of those
Subjects who lived under such a Magistrate.

Indeed their Happiness appears to have been so complete, that we are aware
lest some Advocate for arbitrary Power should hereafter quote the Case of those
People, as an Instance of the great Advantages which attend that Government
above all others.

And here we will make a concession, which would not perhaps have been expected
from us, That no limited Form of Government is capable of rising to the same
Degree of Perfection, or of producing the same Benefits to Society with this.
Mankind have never been so happy, as when the greatest Part of the then known
World was under the Dominion of a single Master; and this State of their
Felicity continued during the Reigns of five successive Princes Nerva, Trajan,
Adrian, and the two Antonini.
. This was the true Era of the Golden Age, and the only Golden Age which ever
had any Existence, unless in the warm Imaginations of the Poets, from the
Expulsion from Eden down to this Day.

In reality, I know but of one solid Objection to absolute Monarchy. The only
Defect of this excellent Constitution seems to be the Difficulty of finding any
Man adequate to the Office of an absolute Monarch: For this indispensably
requires three Qualities very difficult, as it appears from History, to be
found in princely Natures: First a sufficient Quantity of Moderation in the
Prince, to be contented with all the Power which is possible for him to have.
2dly, Enough of Wisdom to know his own Happiness. And, 3dly, Goodness
sufficient to support the Happiness of others, when not only compatible with,
but instrumental to his own.

Now if an absolute Monarch with all these great and rare Qualifications should
be allowed capable of conferring the greatest Good on Society, it must be
surely granted, on the contrary, that absolute Power vested in the Hands of one
who is deficient in them all, is likely to be attended with no less a Degree of
Evil.

In short our own Religion furnishes us with adequate Ideas of the Blessing, as
well as Curse which may attend absolute Power. The Pictures of Heaven and of
Hell will place a very lively Image of both before our Eyes: For though the
Prince of the latter can have no Power, but what he originally derives from the
omnipotent Sovereign in the former; yet it plainly appears from Scripture, that
absolute Power in his infernal Dominions, is granted to their Diabolical Ruler.
This is indeed the only absolute Power which can by Scripture be derived from
Heaven. If therefore the several Tyrannies upon Earth can prove any Title to a
divine Authority, it must be derived from this original Grant to the Prince of
Darkness, and these subordinate Deputations must consequently come immediately
from him whose Stamp they so expressly bear.

To conclude, as the Examples of all Ages show us that Mankind in general
desire Power only to do Harm, and when they obtain it, use it for no other
Purpose; it is not consonant with even the least Degree of Prudence to hazard
an Alteration, where our Hopes are poorly kept in Countenance by only two or
three Exceptions out of a thousand Instances to alarm our Fears. In this Case
it will be much wiser to submit to a few Inconveniences arising from the
dispassionate Deafness of Laws than to remedy them by applying to the
passionate open Ears of a Tyrant.

Nor can the Examples of the Gypsies, though possibly they may have long been
happy under this Form of Government, be here urged; since we must remember the
very material Respect in which they differ from all other People, and to which
perhaps this their Happiness is entirely owing, namely, that they have no false
Honors among them; and that they look on Shame as the most grievous Punishment
in the World.

CHAP. XIII. A Dialogue between Jones and Partridge.
THE honest Lovers of Liberty will we doubt not pardon that long Digression
into which we were led at the Close of the last Chapter, to prevent our History
from being applied to the Use of the most pernicious Doctrine, which
Priestcraft had ever the Wickedness or the Impudence to preach.

We will now proceed with Mr. Jones, who when the Storm was over, took Leave of
his Egyptian Majesty, after many Thanks for his courteous Behavior and kind
Entertainment, and set out for Coventry; to which Place (for it was still dark)
a Gypsy was ordered to conduct him.

Jones having by Reason of his Deviation, traveled eleven Miles instead of
six, and most of those through very execrable Roads, where no Expedition could
have been made, in Quest of a Midwife, did not arrive at Coventry till near
Twelve. Nor could he possibly get again into the Saddle till past Two; for
Posthorses were now not easy to get; nor were the Hostler or Post-Boy, in half
so great a Hurry as himself, but chose rather to imitate the tranquil
Disposition of Partridge; who being denied the Nourishment of Sleep, took all
Opportunities to supply its Place with every other Kind of Nourishment, and was
never better pleased than when he arrived at an Inn, nor ever more dissatisfied
than when he was again forced to leave it.

Jones now traveled Post; we will follow him therefore, according to our
Custom, and to the Rules of Longinus, in the same Manner. From Coventry he
arrived at Daventry, from Daventry at Stratford, and from Stratford at
Dunstable, whither he came the next Day a little after Noon, and within a few
Hours after Sophia had left it; and though he was obliged to stay here longer
than he wished, while a Smith, with great Deliberation, shoed the Post-Horse he
was to ride, he doubted not but to overtake his Sophia before she should set
out from St. Albans; at which Place he concluded, and very reasonably, that his
Lordship would stop and dine.

And had he been right in this Conjecture, he most probably would have
overtaken his Angel at the aforesaid Place; but unluckily my Lord had appointed
a Dinner to be prepared for him at his own House in London, and in order to
enable him to reach that Place in proper Time, he had ordered a Relay of Horses
to meet him at St. Albans. When Jones therefore arrived there, he was informed
that the Coach and Six had set out two Hours before.

If fresh Posthorses had been now ready, as they were not, it seemed so
apparently impossible to overtake the Coach before it reached London, that
Partridge thought he had now a proper Opportunity to remind his Friend of a
Matter which he seemed entirely to have forgotton; what this was the Reader
will guess, when we inform him that Jones had eat nothing more than one poached
Egg since he had left the Alehouse where he had first met the Guide returning
from Sophia; for with the Gypsies, he had only feasted his Understanding.

The Landlord so entirely agreed with the Opinion of Mr. Partridge, that he no
sooner heard the latter desire his Friend to stay and dine, than he very
readily put in his Word, and retracting his Promise before given of furnishing
the Horses immediately, he assured Mr. Jones he would lose no Time in
bespeaking a Dinner, which, he said, could be got ready sooner than it was
possible to get the Horses up from Grass, and to prepare them for their Journey
by a Feed of Corn.

Jones was at length prevailed on, chiefly by the latter Argument of the
Landlord; and now a Joint of Mutton was put down to the Fire. While this was
preparing, Partridge being admitted into the same Apartment with his Friend or
Master, began to harangue in the following Manner.

'Certainly, Sir, if ever Man deserved a young Lady, you deserve young Madam
Western; for what a vast Quantity of Love must a Man have, to be able to live
upon it without any other Food, as you do. I am positive I have eat thirty
times as much within these last twenty four Hours as your Honor, and yet I am
almost famished; for nothing makes a Man so hungry as traveling, especially in
this cold raw weather. And yet I cannot tell how it is, but your Honor is
seemingly in perfect good Health, and you never looked better nor fresher in
your Life. It must certainly be Love that you live upon.'

'And very rich Diet too, Partridge.' answered Jones. But did not Fortune send
me an excellent Dainty Yesterday? Do thou imagine I cannot live more than
twenty-four Hours on this dear Pocketbook.'

'Undoubtedly,' cries Partridge, there is enough in that Pocketbook to
purchase many a good Meal. Fortune sent it to your Honor very opportunely for
present Use, as your Honor's Money must be almost out by this Time.'

'What do you mean?' answered Jones; I hope you don't imagine I should be
dishonest enough, even if it belonged to any other Person, besides Miss Western
-- '

'Dishonest! replied Partridge; Heaven forbid I should wrong your Honor so
much; but where is the Dishonesty in borrowing a little for present spending,
since you will be so well able to pay the Lady hereafter. No indeed, I would
have your Honor pay it again, as soon as it is convenient, by all Means; but
where can be the Harm in making use of it now you want it. Indeed if it
belonged to a poor Body, it would be another thing; but so great a Lady to be
sure can never want it, especially now as she is along with a Lord, who it
cannot be doubted will let her have whatever she has need of. Besides, if she
should wan't a little, she cannot want the whole, therefore I would give her a
little; but I would be hanged before I mentioned the having found it at first,
and before I got some Money of my own; for London, I have heard, is the very
worst of Places to be in without Money. Indeed, if I had not known to whom it
belonged, I might have thought it was the Devil's Money, and have been afraid
to use it; but as you know otherwise, and came honestly by it, it would be an
Affront to Fortune to part with it all again, at the very Time when you want it
most; you can hardly expect she should ever do you such another good Turn; for
Fortuna nunquam perpetuo est bona. You will do as you please, notwithstanding
all I say; but for my Part, I would be hanged before I mentioned a Word of the
Matter.'

'By what I can see, Partridge, cries Jones, hanging is a Matter non long
alienum a Scaevolae studiis.' You should say alienus,' says Partridge -- I
remember the Passage; it is an Example under Communis, Alienus, immunis, variis
casibus, serviunt.' If you do remember it,' cries Jones, 'I find you don't
understand it; but I tell thee, Friend, in plain English, that he who finds
another's Property, and wilfully detains it from the known Owner, deserves in
Foro Conscientiae, to be hanged no less than if he had stolen it. And as for
this very identical Bill, which is the Property of my Angel, and was once in
her dear Possession, I will not deliver it into any Hands but her own, upon any
Consideration whatever: No, though I was as hungry as thou art, and had no other
Means to satisfy my craving Appetite; this I hope to do before I sleep; but if
it should happen otherwise, I charge thee, if thou would not incur my
Displeasure for ever, not to shock me any more by the bare Mention of such
detestable Baseness.'

'I should not have mentioned it now, cries Partridge, if it had appeared so to
me; for I Am sure I scorn any Wickedness as much as another; but perhaps you
know better; and yet I might have imagined that I should not have lived so many
Years, and have taught School so long, without being able to distinguish
between Fas and Nefas; but it seems we are to live and learn. I remember my
old-Schoolmaster, who was a prodigious great Scholar, used often to say, Polly
Matete cry Town is my Daskalon. The English of which, he told us, was, That a
Child may sometimes teach his Grandmother to suck Eggs. I have lived to a fine
Purpose truly, if I am to be taught my Grammar at this Time of Day. Perhaps,
young Gentleman, you may change your Opinion if you live to my Years: For I
remember I thought myself as wise when I was a Stripling of one or two and
twenty as I am now. I am sure I always taught alienus, and my Master read it so
before me.'

There were not many Instances in which Partridge could provoke Jones, nor were
there many in which Partridge himself could have been hurried out of his
Respect. Unluckily however they had both hit on one of these. We have already
seen Partridge could not bear to have his Learning attacked, nor could Jones
bear some Passage or other in the foregoing Speech. And now looking upon his
Companion with a contemptuous and disdainful Air (a thing not usual with him)
he cried, 'Partridge, I see thou art a conceited old Fool, and I wish thou art
not likewise an old Rogue. Indeed if I was as well convinced of the latter as I
am of the former, thou should travel no farther in my Company.'

The sage Pedagogue was contented with the Vent which he had already given to
his Indignation; and, as the vulgar Phrase is, immediately drew in his Horns.
He said, He was sorry he had uttered any thing which might give Offense, for
that he had never intended it; but Nemo omnibus horis sapit.

As Jones had the Vices of a warm Disposition, he was entirely free from those
of a cold one; and if his Friends must have confessed his Temper to have been a
little too easily ruffled, his Enemies must at the same Time have confessed, that
it as soon subsided; nor did it at all resemble the Sea, whose Swelling is more
violent and dangerous after a Storm is over, than while the Storm itself
subsists. He instantly accepted the Submission of Partridge, shook him by the
Hand, and with the most benign Aspect imaginable, said twenty kind Things, and
at the same Time very severely condemned himself, though not half so severely as
he will most probably be condemned by many of our good Readers.

Partridge was now highly comforted, as his Fears of having offended were at
once abolished, and his Pride completely satified by Jones's having owned
himself in the wrong, which Submission he instantly applied to what had
principally nettled him, and repeated, in a muttering Voice, 'To be sure, Sir,
your Knowledge may be superior to mine in some Things; but as to the Grammar, I
think I may challenge any Man living. I think, at least, I have that at my
Finger's Ends.'

If any thing could add to the Satisfaction which the poor Man now enjoyed, he
received this Addition by the Arrival of an excellent Shoulder of Mutton, that
at this Instant came smoking to the Table. On which, having both plentifully
feasted, they again mounted their Horses, and set forward for London.

CHAP. XIV. What happened to Mr. Jones on his Journey from St. Albans.
THEY were got about two Miles beyond Barnett, and it was now the Dusk of the
Evening, when a genteel looking Man, but upon a very shabby Horse, rode up to
Jones, and asked him whether he was going to London, to which Jones answered in
the affirmative. The Gentleman replied, 'I should be obliged to you, Sir, if
you will accept of my Company; for it is very late, and I am a Stranger to the
Road.' Jones readily complied with the Request; and on they traveled together,
holding that Sort of Discourse which is usual on such Occasions.

Of this, indeed, Robbery was the principal Topic; upon which Subject the
Stranger expressed great Apprehensions; but Jones declared he had very little
to lose, and consequently as little to fear. Here Partridge, could not forbear
putting in his Word. 'Your Honor, said he, may think it a little, but I am
sure, if I had a hundred Pound Bank Note in my Pocket, as you have, I should be
very sorry to lose it; but, for my Part, I never was less afraid in my Life;
for we are four of us, and if we all stand by one another, the best Man in
England cannot rob us. Suppose he should have a Pistol, he can kill but one of
us, and a Man can die but once, that is my Comfort, a Man can die but once.'

Besides the Reliance on superior Numbers, a kind of Valor which has raised a
certain Nation among the Moderns to a high Pitch of Glory, there was another
Reason for the extraordinary Courage which Partridge now discovered; for he had
at present as much of that Quality as was in the Power of Liquor to bestow.

Our Company were now arrived within a Mile of Highgate, when the Stranger
turned short upon Jones, and pulling out a Pistol, demanded that little Bank
Note which Partridge had mentioned.

Jones was at first somewhat shocked at this unexpected Demand; however, he
presently recollected himself, and told the Highwayman, all the Money he had in
his Pocket was entirely at his Service; and so saying, he pulled out upwards of
three Guineas, and offered to deliver it; but the other answered with an Oath,
That would not do. Jones answered cooly, He was very sorry for it, and returned
the Money into his Pocket.

The Highwayman then threatened, if he did not deliver the Bank Note that
Moment, he must shoot him; holding his Pistol at the same Time very near to his
Breast. Jones instantly caught hold of the Fellow's Hand, which trembled so
that he could scarce hold the Pistol in it, and turned the Muzzle from him. A
Struggle then ensued, in which the former wrested the Pistol from the Hand of
his Antagonist, and both came from their Horses on the Ground together, the
Highwayman upon his Back, and the victorious Jones upon him.

The poor Fellow now began to implore Mercy of the Conqueror; for, to say the
Truth, he was in Strength by no Means a Match for Jones. 'Indeed, Sir, says he,
I could have had no Intention to shoot you, for you will find the Pistol was
not loaded. This is the first Robbery I ever attempted, and I have been driven
by Distress to this.'

At this Instant, at about a hundred and fifty Yards Distance, lay another
Person on the Ground, roaring for Mercy in a much louder Voice than the
Highwayman. This was no other than Partridge himself, who endeavoring to make
his Escape from the Engagement, had been thrown from his Horse, and lay flat on
his Face, not daring to look up, and expecting every Minute to be shot.

In this Posture he lay, till the Guide, who was no otherwise concerned than
for his Horses, having secured the stumbling Beast, came up to him and told
him, his Master had got the better of the Highwayman.

Partridge leapt at this News, and ran back to the Place, where Jones stood
with his Sword drawn in his Hand to guard the poor Fellow; which Partridge no
sooner saw, than he cried out, 'Kill the Villain, Sir, run him through the
Body, kill him this Instant.'

Luckily however for the poor Wretch he had fallen into more merciful Hands;
for Jones having examined the Pistol, and found it to be really unloaded, began
to believe all the Man had told him before Partridge came up; namely, that he
was a Novice in the Trade, and that he had been driven to it by the Distress he
mentioned, the greatest indeed imaginable, that of five hungry Children, and
Wife lying in of a sixth, in the utmost Want and Misery. The Truth of all which
the Highwayman most vehemently asserted, and offered to convince Mr. Jones of,
if he would take the Trouble to go to his House, which was not above two Miles
off; saying, 'That he desired no Favor, but upon Condition of proving all he
had alleged.'

Jones at first pretended that he would take the Fellow at his Word, and return
with him, declaring that his Fate should depend entirely on the Truth of his
Story. Upon this the poor Fellow immediately expressed so much Alacrity, that
Jones was perfectly satisfied with his Veracity, and began now to entertain
Sentiments of Compassion for him. He returned the Fellow his empty Pistol,
advised him to think of honester Means of relieving his Distress, and gave him
a couple of Guineas for the immediate Support of his Wife and his Family;
adding, 'he wished he had more for his Sake, but the hundred Pound that had
been mentioned, was not his own.'

Our Readers will probably be divided in their Opinions concerning this Action?
some may applaud it perhaps as an Act of extraordinary Humanity, while those of
a more saturnine Temper will consider it as a Want of Regard to that Justice
which every Man owes his Country. Partridge certainly saw it in that Light; for
he testified much Dissatisfaction on the Occasion, quoted an old Proverb, and
said, He should not wonder if the Rogue attacked them again before they reached
London.

The Highwayman was full of Expressions of Thankfulness and Gratitude. He
actually dropped Tears, or pretended so to do. He vowed he would immediately
return home, and would never afterward commit any such Transgression; whether
he kept his Word or no, perhaps, may appear hereafter.

Our Travelers having remounted their Horses, arrived in Town without
encountering any new mishap. On the Road much pleasant Discourse passed between
Jones and Partridge, on the Subject of their last Adventure. In which Jones
expressed a great Compassion for those Highwaymen, who are, by unavoidable
Distress, driven, as it were, to such illegal Courses, as generally bring them
to a shameful Death. 'I mean, said he, those only whose highest Guilt extends
no farther than to Robbery, and who are never guilty of Cruelty nor insult to
any Person, which is a Circumstance that, I must say, to the Honor of our
Country, distinguishes the Robbers of England from those of all other Nations;
for Murder is, amongst those, almost inseparably incident to Robbery.'

'No doubt, answered Partridge, it is better to take away one's Money than
one'^ Life, and yet it is very hard upon honest Men, that they cannot travel
about their Business without being in Danger of these Villains. And to be sure
it would be better that all Rogues were hanged out of the Way, than that one
honest Man should suffer. For my own Part, indeed, I should not care to have
the Blood of any of them on my own Hands; but it is very proper for the Law to
hang them all. What Right has any Man to take Sixpence from me, unless I give
it him? Is there any honesty in such a Man?'

'No surely, cries Jones, no more than there is in him who takes the Horses out
of another Man's Stable, or who applies to his own Use the Money which he
finds, when he knows the Right Owner.'

These Hints stopped the Mouth of Partridge, nor did he open it again till Jones
having thrown some sarcastical Jokes on his Cowardice, he offered to excuse
himself on the Inequality of Fire Arms, saying, 'A thousand naked Men are
nothing to one Pistol; for though it is true, it will kill but one at a single
Discharge, yet who can tell but that one may be himself.'

The End of the Second Volume.
