


TO
THE RIGHT HON.
THE COUNTESS OF GIFFORD,
AS A TOKEN OF
RESPECT, SYMPATHY, AND ADMIRATION
_This Tale_
IS INSCRIBED BY
THE AUTHOR




_A PRELIMINARY WORD_

The writer of this Tale ventures, in his own person, to address a very few
words, chiefly of explanation, to his readers. A leading situation in this
'Story of Bartram-Haugh' is repeated, with a slight variation, from a short
magazine tale of some fifteen pages written by him, and published long ago
in a periodical under the title of 'A Passage in the Secret History of an
Irish Countess,' and afterwards, still anonymously, in a small volume under
an altered title. It is very unlikely that any of his readers should have
encountered, and still more so that they should remember, this trifle. The
bare possibility, however, he has ventured to anticipate by this brief
explanation, lest he should be charged with plagiarism--always a disrespect
to a reader.

May he be permitted a few words also of remonstrance against the
promiscuous application of the term 'sensation' to that large school of
fiction which transgresses no one of those canons of construction and
morality which, in producing the unapproachable 'Waverley Novels,' their
great author imposed upon himself? No one, it is assumed, would describe
Sir Walter Scott's romances as 'sensation novels;' yet in that marvellous
series there is not a single tale in which death, crime, and, in some form,
mystery, have not a place.

Passing by those grand romances of 'Ivanhoe,' 'Old Mortality,' and
'Kenilworth,' with their terrible intricacies of crime and bloodshed,
constructed with so fine a mastery of the art of exciting suspense and
horror, let the reader pick out those two exceptional novels in the series
which profess to paint contemporary manners and the scenes of common life;
and remembering in the 'Antiquary' the vision in the tapestried chamber,
the duel, the horrible secret, and the death of old Elspeth, the drowned
fisherman, and above all the tremendous situation of the tide-bound party
under the cliffs; and in 'St. Ronan's Well,' the long-drawn mystery, the
suspicion of insanity, and the catastrophe of suicide;--determine whether
an epithet which it would be a profanation to apply to the structure of
any, even the most exciting of Sir Walter Scott's stories, is fairly
applicable to tales which, though illimitably inferior in execution, yet
observe the same limitations of incident, and the same moral aims.

The author trusts that the Press, to whose masterly criticism and generous
encouragement he and other humble labourers in the art owe so much, will
insist upon the limitation of that degrading term to the peculiar type of
fiction which it was originally intended to indicate, and prevent, as they
may, its being made to include the legitimate school of tragic English
romance, which has been ennobled, and in great measure founded, by the
genius of Sir Walter Scott.




CONTENTS


CHAPTER

I. AUSTIN RUTHYN, OF KNOWL, AND HIS DAUGHTER

II. UNCLE SILAS

III. A NEW FACE

IV. MADAME DE LA ROUGIERRE

V. SIGHTS AND NOISES

VI. A WALK IN THE WOOD

VII. CHURCH SCARSDALE

VIII. THE SMOKER

IX. MONICA KNOLLYS

X. LADY KNOLLYS REMOVES A COVERLET

XI. LADY KNOLLYS SEES THE FEATURES

XII. A CURIOUS CONVERSATION

XIII. BEFORE AND AFTER BREAKFAST

XIV. ANGRY WORDS

XV. A WARNING

XVI. DOCTOR BRYERLY LOOKS IN

XVII. AN ADVENTURE

XVIII. A MIDNIGHT VISITOR

XIX. AU REVOIR

XX. AUSTIN RUTHYN SETS OUT ON HIS JOURNEY

XXI. ARRIVALS

XXII. SOMEBODY IN THE ROOM WITH THE COFFIN

XXIII. I TALK WITH DOCTOR BRYERLY
